ira
b, V
MR
84,
tes,
Received 28 April 2010
Revised 2 July 2010
Accepted 7 July 2010
Available online 12 July 2010
Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental
.e lIntroduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is one of the leading causes of disabilities in
young adults. An impaired transmission in sensory-motor neurons,
including autonomic neurons, induces functional deficits and compro-
mises life expectancy. Cervical injuries, which account for half of SCI
cases (Jackson et al., 2004), are the most debilitating because they
generally sever the bulbo-spinal respiratory drive to phrenic motoneu-
ron pools (C3–C5) and, as a consequence, generate a diaphragm
dysfunction. Mostly, cervically injured individuals require intensive
post-SCI care with chronic respiratory ventilation assistance (Berlly and
Shem, 2007). Respiratory symptoms include reduced vital capacity and
secondary complications such as pulmonary infections (Berlly and
been tested in animalmodels andsomeclinical trials havebeen initiated.
Implantation of olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) seems to be one of
themostpromising(Kocsis et al., 2009;RaismanandLi, 2007).While the
majority of the transplantation studies have used olfactory bulb-derived
OECs (central), OECs can be alsoprepared from the laminapropria of the
olfactory mucosa (peripheral) by nasal biopsy (Bianco et al., 2004;
Richter and Roskams, 2008). The olfactory mucosa cells have already
been autologously transplanted in paraplegic patients during a phase I/
IIa clinical trial (Feron et al., 2005; Mackay-Sim et al., 2008). In addition,
there is no associated co-morbidity since it has been shown that
olfactory biopsies do not impair the sense of smell (Feron et al., 1998).
We have recently developed a cervical spinal cord contusion
model relevant to the observed respiratory deficit after SCI (BaussartShem, 2007; Brown et al., 2006). It is therefor
develop strategies aiming to restore respirato
Although effective treatments for SCI ar
rehabilitative strategies such as cellular and m
⁎ Corresponding author. Université Paul Cézanne-CNR
Normandie Niemen, case 352, 13397 Marseille, France.
1 Equally contributing authors.
0014-4886/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. Al
doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.07.002Keywords:
OEC
Breathing
Cervical contusion
Phrenic
Diaphragm
Recoveryspinal cord repair and one clinical trial has already been initiated. However, while the vast majority of
fundamental studies were focused on the recovery of locomotor function, the efficiency of this cellular tool
for repairing respiratory motor dysfunction, which affects more than half of paraplegic/tetraplegic patients,
remains unknown. Using a rat model that mimics the mechanisms encountered after a cervical contusion
that induces a persistent hemi-diaphragmatic paralysis, we assessed the therapeutic efficiency of a delayed
transplantation (2 weeks post-contusion) of nasal OECs within the injured spinal cord. Functional recovery
was quantified with respiratory behavior tests, diaphragmatic electromyography and neuro-electrophysio-
logical recording of the phrenic motoneurons while axogenesis was evaluated using immunohistochemistry.
We show that 3 months post-transplantation, nasal OECs improve i) breathing movements, ii) activities of
the ipsilateral diaphragm and corresponding phrenic nerve, and iii) axonal sprouting in the injury site. We
also demonstrate that this functional partial recovery is mediated by the restoration of ipsilateral supraspinal
command. Our study brings further evidence that olfactory ensheathing cells could have clinical application
especially in tetraplegic patients with impaired breathing movements. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled: Understanding olfactory ensheathing glia and their prospect for nervous system repair.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.e of prime importance to
ry capacities.
e limited, most recently
olecular therapies have
et al., 2006). Th
quantifiable diap
model of high ce
cell transplantat
current study, w
nasal OECs pro
breathing was a
ratory behaviou
S UMR 6231, Avenue Escadrille
Fax: +33 491 288 885.
l rights reserved.OEC) is considered as a promising therapeutic strategy forArticle history: Engraftment of nasal olfactory ensheathing cells (a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oNasal OEC transplantation promotes resp
of cervical spinal cord contusion
J.C. Stamegna a,b,1, M.S Felix a,b,1, J. Roux-Peyronnet a,
P. Gauthier a,b, V. Matarazzo a,b,⁎
a Centre de Recherche en Neurobiologie et Neurophysiologie de Marseille, CRN2M, CNRS U
b Université Paul Cézanne, 13397 Marseille, France
c Neurobiologie des Interactions Cellulaires et Neurophysiopathologie, NICN, CNRS UMR 61
d Centre d'Investigations Cliniques en Biothérapie CIC-B 510, AP-HM, Institut Paoli Calmet
j ourna l homepage: wwwtory recovery in a subchronic rat model
. Rossi a,b, F. Féron c,d,
6231, 13397 Marseille, France
Université de la Méditerranée, 13344 Marseille, France
Inserm, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France
Neurology
sev ie r.com/ locate /yexnris rat model induces a persistent, reproducible and
hragm respiratory deficit. It is a unique experimental
rvical contusion dedicated to assess the efficiency of
ion on breathing recovery after cervical SCI. In the
e have tested whether a delayed transplantation of
mote respiratory recovery. Functional recovery of
ssessed 3 months post-transplantation, using respi-
ral plethysmography and EMG of the diaphragm.
121J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131Activity of phrenic nerve and immunohistochemistry were used to
explore reorganizational changes in the cervical cord.
Materials and methods
Animal care and handling were conducted in accordance with the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, the Guidelines for
the Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research and French laws relevant
to animal experiments and surgery (accreditation no. C13-055-6 from
the French Ministry of Agriculture).
Primary culture and purification of nasal OECs
Five male inbred Sprague Dawley adult rats, weighing 250 g, were
used (Janvier, France). Cultures of OECs were prepared as previously
described (Bianco et al., 2004; Lu et al., 2001). Briefly, the laminapropria
was dissociated and cells were re-suspended in DMEM/HAMF12
supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum and plated on poly-L-lysine
(2 μg/cm2) coated dishes. Two days later, the culture medium was
changed for serum-free medium supplemented with neurotrophin 3
(NT3, 50 ng/ml), which is known to enhance survival of OECs in culture
with their purity approaching 100% (Bianco et al., 2004). Over 90% of
cells in the OEC cultures were p75NFR and GFAP immunoreactive. As a
control for contaminationwith Schwann cellsmyelinatingmotor axons,
cultures were tested and found negative with HNK1 antibody (Sigma
Castle Hill, NSW, Australia). However, this testing could not rule out
contamination with sensory axon-myelinating or non-myelinating
Schwann cells, which are known to lack the HNK1 epitope (Bock
et al., 2007; Martini et al., 1994; Saito et al., 2005)
Surgical procedures
Female adult Sprague Dawley rats, weighing 250 g at the start of
the experiment, were used (Janvier, France). In order to avoid
putative cell rejection, we used inbred littermates for both donor
and receiver animals. Anesthesia was achieved intraperitoneally with
pentobarbital (Nembutal, 50 mg/kg, ip; Sanofi, France). Cervical
contusion was performed as previously described (Baussart et al.,
2006) for contused control rats (n=4), MEDIUM and OEC rat groups
(n=6 for each group). Briefly, through a midline dorsal cervical
incision, a standard bilateral C2 laminectomy was performed with
great care, especially when removing the left part of the vertebra, in
order to visualize the far-lateral part of the left spinal cord. The dura
was opened longitudinally and laterally at the level of the left C2
dorsal root (window of 2.5×2.5 mm) and a dorso-lateral resection of
the piamatter was carried out withmicroscissors in order to remove a
fragment measuring around 1 mm (transversal axis corresponding to
the half-lateral part of the left C2 hemispinal cord)×1 mm (rostro-
caudal axis). The aim of partly removing the pia matter was to reduce
the shock absorption by the pia matter in order to intensify the
damage on the ventrolateral white matter. The injury was performed
caudally to the left C2 dorsal root under the operating microscope. A
0.8 mm-diameter, 120 mm-long metallic rod (referred as the impac-
tor) was applied to the left C2 spinal cord at the level of the pia matter
window and slowly lowered ventrally (3 mm depth) toward the floor
of the C2 vertebral body. A 20 g weight was dropped along the
impactor from a height of 12 cm. The compression wasmaintained for
30 min with the 20 g weight left in situ. Lastly, the impactor was
removed gently, and the wound was closed without drainage after
cleaning with betadine. This injury produces a persistent and
reproductible hemi-diaphragm paralysis.
Cell transplantation
Fifteen days post-injury, rats were reanaesthetised with the same
procedure as paragraph 2.2 and, after gaining surgical access to theinjured region, cells ormediumwere transplanted using a 5 μl Hamilton
glass syringe, connected to a 27 gauge needle and attached to a
micromanipulator. MEDIUM animals received injection of DMEM/
HAMF12, and transplanted animals received OECs. Medium or cells in
the same medium were injected to the spinal cord on the site of the
lesion. Injectionsweredelivered at spinal sites 1.5 mmlaterally fromthe
midline: 1 mm rostrally, 1.5–2 mm caudally and inside the lesion. To
reach the ventral and ventrolateral funiculi where the descending
respiratory pathways are located, each spinal site received two
injections (0.5 μl each) given at 2 and 3 mm below the dorsal surface
of the cord. Each animal received a total of 6 injections (6×0.5 μl)which
contained OEC suspension (100,000 cells/μl) or DMEM/HAMF12. The
injection was given at 0.5 μl/min. The syringe was left in the injection
site for 2 min to avoid reflux. No immunosuppressant was used.
Plethysmography
Ventilation was measured in awake unrestrained MEDIUM and
OEC rats using barometric plethysmography. Control rats (uninjured)
were used for comparison (n=5). According to the protocol
described previously (Peyronnet et al., 2000), calibration of the
chamber was obtained before placing the animal in the box. Either a
MEDIUM or an OEC rat was placed in the chamber for measurements
of ventilation. Tidal volume, respiratory frequency and minute
ventilation were calculated from breath-by-breath over 30–50
consecutive cycles (around 30 s) by computer analysis of the
spirogram. All measurements in normoxia were performed in
quadruplet for each rat. The mean of these 4 values was considered
as the basal ventilation. The hypoxic test was carried out by flushing
the plethysmograph chamber with a mixture of 10% O2 and 90% N2.
After the 10% O2 level was reached inside the chamber, the system
was clamped to perform themeasurements (at 1, 4, 7 and 10 min after
the beginning of hypoxia) of the hypoxic ventilatory response
involving 40–60 breath cycles for each recordings. The mean of
these 4 measurements represents ventilation in hypoxia.
Diaphragm electromyography
Three months post-grafting, the animals (300–400 g) were
anesthetized and tracheotomized. Diaphragm electromyography
(EMG) and integrated signal (Int EMG) activity of both right and
left (ispilateral to the lesion) hemi-diaphragms were recorded as
previously described (Polentes et al., 2004). The diaphragm EMG was
studied during spontaneous breathing (eupnea) and during imposed
hypercapnic conditions by adapting a 15 cm tube to the tracheal
canula. End tidal CO2 was monitored using a check mate 9900 (PBI
Dansensor) and ranged from 4.8% to 5.2% in eupnea to 7–7.5% during
imposed asphyxic conditions in spontaneously breathing animals.
Phrenic nerves electrophysiology
After the EMG recordings, the animals were paralysed (neuromus-
cular blocking agent: Gallamine triethiodide, 10 mg/kg, iv; Rhône-
Poulenc Rorer, France) and ventilated. Spontaneous activity of both left
(ipsilateral to the lesion) and right phrenic nerves were recorded
(phrenic neurogram, PN; integrated PN, int PN) as previously described
(Polentes et al., 2004) during eupnea and hypercapnia.
The spinal cord connectivity was tested using phrenic orthodromic
activation elicited by supralesional spinal cord stimulation (tungsten
bipolar electrodes: Frederik Haer, 10 kΩ) of the C1 ventral and
ventrolateral funiculi, as previously described (Gauthier andMonteau,
1986; Polentes et al., 2004). These spinal areas include descending
respiratory bulbo-spinal axons which form monosynaptic connec-
tions with phrenic motoneurons (Lipski et al., 1994; Speck, 1988).
Acute sections at the C1 cervical level were conducted at the end of
this invasive surgery/electrophysiology procedure only if the healthy
state (EKG, temperature, myosis) of the animal was stable since
transcardiac perfusion was necessary for immunohistochemistry. In
each condition, 3 animals did not respond to these healthy criteria and
were thus excluded from acute sections and directly perfused.
All signalsweremonitoredonaGouldoscilloscope(Gould1604)and
computer recorded using the Gould Transition software (Designed by P.
Sanchez, CNRS).
Quantitative aspects of diaphragm and phrenic nerve activity
Twelve different recording sites were used to study the EMG
activity of each hemi-diaphragm. To evaluate the degree of activity of
the left diaphragm, ipsilateral to the spinal injury, the area of each
rectified and integrated trace under the diaphragm EMG was
calculated using a software specifically designed (Dr. P. Sanchez,
CNRS) to exclude any deflection of the rectified and integrated traces
due to artefactual incidence, such as deflections due to EKG in sites
near the heart. The 12 recording sites cover a substantial area of the
parts of the muscle involved in breathing activity, that is, the pars
sternalis, the rostral pars costalis and the rostral part of the lumbar
diaphragm which surrounds the level of the cava vein. For each
recording site, the averaged area of five characteristic successive EMG
rectified and integrated traces was calculated. For each recording site,
the left averaged rectified and integrated area was calculated as a
percentage of the corresponding right rectified and integrated surface
(% left/right). For each animal, the mean left EMG diaphragm activity
rd a
d 3
μm
122 J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131Fig. 1. Histological representation of a lateral compression/contusion of the rat spinal co
cord with the injury indicated by a large black dot. The size of the injury was measure
3 months post-injury to show the extent of the lesion at the ventral level (scale bar: 500
longitudinal/horizontal sections of the cervical spinal cord (scale bar: 200 μm).t the C2 cervical level. A: Drawing represents a longitudinal view of the cervical spinal
months post-injury. B: Violet cresyl on longitudinal/horizontal section was performed
). C: Immunocytochemistry for GAP43 and GFAP was performed 2 days post-injury on
injured side in one animal group (stated as OEC, n=6)while the other
group received volume-matched DMEM injection (stated as MEDIUM,
n=6). We then assessed the animals 3 months post-transplantation.
Functional partial recovery of breath behavior
To avoid weight-dependent variations in breathing patterns (Fuller
et al., 2008), Control (uninjured), MEDIUM and OEC rat groups were
weight-matched (Control: 0.302±0.011;MEDIUM: 0.312±0.013; OEC:
0.325±0.028 kg). Three and half months post-injury, plethysmography
analyses revealed that, in normoxia (i.e. 21% O2, balance N2), injured
animals (either MEDIUM or OEC) had lower minute ventilation values
compared to control rats. Moreover, both MEDIUM and OEC groups had
similar minute ventilation values (Fig. 2A). In contrast, during hypoxia
123J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131was calculated as the average of the 12 recording sites (% left/right).
To quantify the activity of the left phrenic nerve ipsilateral to the
lesion, five successive typical phrenic bursts were selected and the
average surface of their rectified and integrated traces was calculated
using the same software as for diaphragm EMG. For each rat, and for
each step of the experiment, the left averaged rectified and integrated
phrenic nerve activity was calculated as a percentage of the
corresponding right rectified and integrated surface (% left/right). In
each animal, the right phrenic nerve activity was taken as a reference
to quantify the left one under chronic conditions, to prevent inter-
variability.
Immunohistochemistry
Longitudinal/horizontal sections of the cervical spinal cord of
30 μm were cut on a cryostat. Following two rinses in 0.1 M PBS,
sections on slides were permeabilized using 0.1M PBS containing 0.2%
Triton X-100 for 30 min. Sections were pre-incubated for 1 h in 0.1 M
PBS containing 4% of goat serum and incubated overnight at 4 °C with
the corresponding primary antibody: rabbit anti-serotonin (1/2000,
Sigma, USA), mouse anti-neurofilament H phosphorylated (1/1000,
Eurogentec-Covance, USA), rabbit anti-GFAP (1/1000; DAKO, France),
and rabbit anti-GAP43 (1/1000; Chemicon, USA). Following primary
antibody incubation, sections were incubated 1 h at room tempera-
ture with the appropriate secondary antibody: goat anti-mouse Alexa
488 and goat anti-rabbit Alexa 594 (1/400; Invitrogen, France).
Image analyses
Confocal images were captured with a Leica TCS SP2 scanning
confocal microscope (Leica) equipped with a 10× lens (HCX PL APO,
NA 0.4), argon (488 nm) and helium (543 nm) lasers and monitored
with LCS v2.61 image acquisition software. On longitudinal/horizontal
sections, Z-stacks from 10 confocal images (1 μm focal spacing) were
acquired at the C2 level where the lesion site was visualized by the
GFAP-reactive border. For all animals in each treatment group,
confocal images were performed in the ipsilateral (injured side) and
the corresponding contralateral part (uninjured side). Confocal
images were initiated dorsoventrally, 0.5 mm above the vertebral
floor, and mediolaterally, from the most lateral part of the white
matter to the most lateral part of the ventral horn. Neurofilament and
serotonin immunodensitometry were performed using ImageJ (NIH
software). Quantification of neurofilament and serotonin pixels
within the lesion site was performed by outlining areas measuring
790,000 pixels, splitting RGB channels to conserve neurofilament and
serotonin pixels. Images were converted to 8 bit type images, binary
processed and a similar threshold was applied to normalize staining
between animals. Limit to threshold was checked to include in mea-
surement calculations only thresholded pixels. Number of neurofila-
ment and serotonin positive pixels were then counted using the
measure tool of ImageJ software.
Results
In order to injure the respiratory bulbo-spinal descending path-
ways that control the phrenic motoneuron discharges, all rats
received a lateral contusion on the left side of the spinal cord at the
C2 cervical level. The efficiency of the contusion was verified using
contused control rats (Fig. 1). Immunoreactivity of GAP-43 confirmed
that 48 h after injury, nerve fibers of the spinal cord were injured on
the ipsilateral side (injured side) while the controlateral side (non-
injured) remained intact. As a constituent of astrocytes, GFAP
immunoreactivity was detected in non-injured side of the cord, but
GFAP immunoreactivity was upregulated on the injured side
indicating the presence of classical astrocyte reactivity after injury.
Fifteen days after injury, nasal OEC cells were transplanted in theFig. 2. Breathing performance of control (uninjured), MEDIUM and OEC-grafted rats
3.5 months post-contusion. Minute ventilation (A), inspiratory frequency (B) and tidal
volume (C) were recorded during quiet breathing (normoxia) and hypoxia (10% O2).
Statistical comparisons were performed using a two-way ANOVA test. Control (n=5);
MEDIUM and OEC (n=6). Error bars represent SEM. *: p valueb0.05; **: p valueb0.01.
(10% O2, balance N2), breathing values in OEC-transplanted rats were
significantly greater than in MEDIUM (Fig. 2A). In order to define which
respiratory volume parameters could be responsible for this breath
behavior benefit, we analyzed the frequency and tidal volume breathing
the right C1 cervical spinal cord (Fig. 4C, right panels). No statistical
differences were observed when comparing the latency and the
amplitude of these responses between two groups. However, when
the stimulation was applied to the ventrolateral column of the left C1
n. A
(hy
agm
124 J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131of the twogroups (Fig. 2B andC). In normoxia condition, both groups had
similar breathing frequency and tidal volume. In contrast, OEC-
transplanted rats responded to hypoxia with an increase in tidal volume
while breathing frequency was unaffected.
Nasal olfactory ensheathing cells transplantation promotes diaphragm
partial recovery
The observed improvement of breathing behavior after OEC
transplantation led us to evaluate the spontaneous muscular activity
of the diaphragm, 3months post-transplantation (Fig. 3). The frequency
of the EMG cycles recorded bilaterally was the same in both groups of
animals. These findings were consistent with those reported above,
using plethysmography. However, while the right-hemi-diaphragm
(non-injured side) remained completely active with no difference
between MEDIUM and OEC groups, the left hemi-diaphragm (injured
side) of the MEDIUM group had a weaker activity, when compared to
that of theOECgroups (Fig. 3A).Weobserved that 21±7%of the injured
hemi-diaphragm remained spontaneously active compared to the right
hemi-diaphragmofMEDIUMgroup.However, in theOEC group, activity
of the injured hemi-diaphragm was significantly increased to 51±6%
(Fig. 3B). This significant increased in OEC compared toMEDIUM group,
in normoxic condition (p value = 0.025), was also observed during
hypercapnia conditions (OEC: 73±7%; MEDIUM: 36±11%; p value =
0.0286). As a result, the OEC-related improved breathing function
originated from a recovery of the left hemi-diaphragm, ipsilateral to the
injured cervical cord.
Transplantation of nasal olfactory ensheathing cells promotes partial
recovery of the left phrenic nerve activities
To further assess the effects of nasal OEC transplantation in SCI
rats, we recorded the spontaneous electrophysiological activities of
both the left (injured) and right (uninjured) phrenic nerves (Fig. 4A).
In both MEDIUM and OECs rat groups, spontaneous activities of the
left and right nerves were present. The right phrenic nerve activities of
both groups appeared similar since no difference between the
averaged surfaces of the phrenic nerve integrated traces were
detected. However, as a consequence of the left lateral contusion,
the left phrenic nerve activities were always weaker than the right
ones. We found that, in the MEDIUM rats, the left phrenic nerve
exhibited an activity average of 23±4% as compared to the right one.
In the OEC group, the activity rose to 54±3%. Thus, the increase in the
OEC rats was significantly greater than that in the MEDIUM group
(Fig. 4B). These results confirm the functional partial recovery of the
diaphragm following the OEC transplantation.
We next investigated the spinal origin of the left phrenic nerve
activity (Fig. 4C). After lateral left contusion, the left phrenic nerve
activity observed in Fig. 4A could arise from the contralateral
(uninjured) spinal cord due to the compensatory “Crossed Phrenic
nerve Phenomenon” (CPP) (Goshgarian, 2003) and/or from ipsilateral
(injured) spinal cord due to a recovery of the ipsilateral descending
respiratory pathways. To explore these two hypotheses, we per-
formed supralesional spinal cord stimulation at the C1 cervical level.
In both MEDIUM and OEC rats, typical orthodromic right phrenic
responses were obtained by stimulating the ventrolateral column of
Fig. 3. Diaphragm activities of MEDIUM and OEC-grafted rats 3.5 months post-contusio
transplanted rats, during spontaneous breathing (normoxia) and imposed asphyxic
diaphragm trace (EMG) and the integrated trace (EMG Int). C: Bar graphs, report diaphr
performed using a Student's t-test. Error bars represent SEM. *: p valueb0.05cervical spinal cord, we observed a lack of response of the left phrenic
nerve in theMEDIUM group (Fig. 4C, left panel). Stimulation extended
to other left C1 spinal cord areas (lateral, latero-dorsal and ventral
columns) also did not elicit response on the left phrenic nerve (not
illustrated). This result demonstrated that, in the MEDIUM group,
spontaneous activities of the left phrenic nerve, and thus the left
hemi-diaphragm were not arising from a recovery of the ipsilateral
descending pathways butmost probably it was due to CPP. In contrast,
in the OEC group, stimulation of the ventrolateral column of the left C1
cervical spinal cord produced orthodromic left phrenic responses with
an increased latency and lower amplitude than that obtained on the
controlateral right side (Fig. 4C, left panel).
Partial recovery of the left phrenic nerve promoted by nasal olfactory
ensheathing cells is mediated by restoration of ipsilateral supraspinal
command
To confirm and further explore the origin of the left phrenic nerve
activity that was observed at 3.5 months after ipsilateral trauma, we
performed, under anesthesia and artificial ventilation conditions, an
acute section at the C1 cervical level (Fig. 5). In each case, the section
started from the midline to the right lateral part of the cord along its
entire depth and the effect of the progressive section on the activity of
both phrenic nerves was continuously recorded. In the OEC group, the
section was also applied from the midline to the left lateral part.
We found that in MEDIUM rats, (Fig. 5A), a medial right section
was enough to completely abolish the left phrenic activity and to
induce a strong decrease of the right phrenic discharge (Fig. 5A, trace
2). The right activity was then totally abolished when the section was
prolonged laterally (complete C1 right hemisection) (Fig. 5A, trace 3).
The fact that any left phrenic activity subsisted after right C1
hemisection (which interrupts descending right command and
particularly the pathways potentially involved in the CPP) confirmed
that the left phrenic activity of the MEDIUM rats originated from the
compensatory effect of the CPP. In contrast for OEC rats, the medial
right section had only poor effect on the left phrenic nerve activity
(Fig. 5B, trace 2). This activity was only partially abolished after C1
right hemisection (Fig. 5B, trace 3) and around half of the activity
persisted (53%; Fig. 5C). Like in MEDIUM rats, the right phrenic nerve
activity was completely suppressed after the rostral ipsilateral
hemisection (Fig. 5B, trace 2). Total interruption of the left phrenic
nerve activity in OEC rats was exclusively obtained after a complete C1
acute section (when the section was directed toward the left side)
(Fig. 5B, trace 4).
Transplantation of nasal olfactory ensheathing cells promotes axonal
sprouting into the lesion site
We finally investigated, at the anatomical level, how OEC
transplantation partially restored the ipsilateral command. For that
purpose, we performed longitudinal sections throughout the contu-
sion site and assessed the presence of axons, using the GFAP-positive
border to delineate the boundaries of the contusion site. Densitometry
of neurofilament (NF) and 5-HT axon fibers was performed by
counting NF and 5-HT pixels within the area of the contusion site
(Fig. 6). In the MEDIUM group, the rostral, epicenter and caudal sites
and B: Typical EMG activity of left and right hemi-diaphragm in MEDIUM and OEC-
percapnia) conditions, is reported. Each hemi-diaphragm activity includes both the
activity in normoxia and hypercapnia conditions (n=6). Statistical comparisons were
125J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
126 J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
of the contusionwere almost devoid of axons (Fig. 6A), as observed 48
h after the contusion (Fig. 1). The small number of bouton-like
varicosities of 5-HT immunoreactive fibers was seen preferentially in
the epicenter of the contusion site (Fig. 6B). As previously observed by
other groups (Ramer et al., 2004; Richter et al., 2005), we found that
3.5 months post-injury, OEC transplantation reduced cystic cavity
maintain basic levels of ventilation and to respond to increased
respiratory drive are highly dependent of the CPP (Fuller et al., 2008;
Golder et al., 2003). Here, we confirm that, 3.5 months post-injury,
basic levels of ventilation in injured rats (MEDIUM group) rely
exclusively on the CPP as an acute contralateral hemisection
completely abolishes ipsilateral phrenic rhythmic output. CPP is also
ts 3.
inte
ied
ind
6)
127J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131area (Fig. 6C). This reduction of cavity area reduction was paired with
a significant increase in NF-positive and 5-HT axons of currently
unknown sources that were promoted by OECs when compared to
MEDIUM rats (Fig. 6D and E). Neurofilament-positive fibers were
mainly orientated in a rostro-caudal way, both in the ventrolateral
and ventromedial aspects. As expected, unaffected ventrolateral
neuronal fibers were observed in the white matter of the contralateral
side. Bouton-like varicosities of 5-HT immunoreactive fibers were
present throughout the contusion site. However, no evidence of 5-HT-
positive cell bodies was observed. Finally, both neurofilament and 5-
HT-positive axons were found in large number rostral to and within
the lesion site and in small number in the caudal area.
Discussion
In line with the pioneering studies of Ramón-Cueto and Nieto-
Sampedro (Ramon-Cueto and Nieto-Sampedro, 1994; Ramon-Cueto
et al., 1998), numerous reports have demonstrated the therapeutic
benefit of OECs when transplanted in rodent models of spinal cord
injury (Richter and Roskams, 2008). However, most of these models,
based on straight hemi- or total transection of the thoracic dorsal
columns, do not accurately reflect the type of injury – contusion or
elongation – usually observed in humans (Bohlman and Anderson,
1992). Furthermore, the vast majority of studies elected a thoracic
section as their preferred model while epidemiology indicates that
more than 50% of SCIs in humans results from a cervical trauma
(Jackson et al., 2004). Finally, most studies have chosen to acutely
transplant OECs, precluding therefore the possibility to perform
autologous graftings. Interestingly, the team that conducted the first
clinical trial based on the use of nasal OECs, opted for autologous
transplants in chronically injured paraplegic patients (Feron et al.,
2005). Three years post-implantation, the procedure was evaluated as
feasible and safe (Mackay-Sim et al., 2008).
The present study is the first to assess the respiratory benefit of
nasal OECs, when subchronically grafted in a rat model of cervical
contusion. Furthermore, in harmony with the protocol used in the
reported clinical trial, we chose to perform semi-autologous (same
litter-mate) graft of nasal OECs in a subchronic model of SCI. In
addition, in order to be as close as possible to clinical context, we
elected a cervical contusion inducing a persistent unilateral diaphrag-
matic paralysis (Baussart et al., 2006). Finally, we transplanted OECs
after a 2-week delay when a peak in reactive astrocyte response is
observed (Tian et al., 2007). Therefore, we were able to assess OECs
efficiency during glial scarring. As a result, this study is the first to
assess the respiratory benefit of nasal OECs, when subchronically
grafted in a rat model of cervical contusion.
We found that there was a significant difference in the response to
hypoxia between the MEDIUM and OEC groups: the hypoxia-induced
increase in minute ventilation was greater in the OEC than MEDIUM
rats. Similar minute ventilation during normoxia in both groups of
rats is in an agreement with (Fuller et al., 2008) who reported that
cervical hemisection does not impair basic levels of ventilation despite
of persisting chronic injury. However, the capacity of an injured rat to
Fig. 4. Spontaneous and evoked phrenic nerve activities of MEDIUM and OEC-grafted ra
rats is reported. Each phrenic nerve activity includes the spontaneous trace (PN) and the
OEC animals evoked by supralesional stimulation (single pulse; 500 μs, 0.4 mA), appl
superimposed individual traces are represented. Dots indicate stimulation; arrowheads
phrenic recovery by quantifying spontaneous activity (n=6) (C) or induced activity (n=
comparison was performed using a Student's t-test. Error bars represent SEM. **: p valuebat play in the OEC group but is not the unique component since the
acute contralateral hemisection did not abolish the ipsilateral phrenic
rhythmic output. In the OEC group, persistent spontaneous activities
of both the ipsilateral phrenic nerve and the diaphragm and their
response to hypercapnia indicate that OECs may restore, at least
partially, the injured phrenic input.
Functional electrophysiology findings also support a role of OECs
in the re-establishment of the ipsilateral injured phrenic central
command. First, supralesional stimulation (at C1 level) elicited sub-
lesional ipsilateral postsynaptic phrenic responses in the OEC group
and not in the MEDIUM group. Second, the spontaneous ipsilateral
phrenic rhythmic activity which was maintained after an acute C1
contralateral hemisection was completely abolished only when an
acute ipsilateral C1 hemisection was performed, thus attesting of the
involvement of ipsilateral pathways restoration in maintaining
phrenic activity after contralateral lesion. However we cannot exclude
that the partial recovery seen after OEC transplants could arise from a
contralateral path that sprouts to the injured side above the level of
the acute C1 contralateral hemisection.
Anatomical data are also consistent with the observed respiratory
recovery. Spinal cord contusion clearly induced a dramatic loss of
axons within and at the boundaries of the injury site. In contrast,
rostro-caudal transplantation of nasal OECs enhanced axonal re-
growth. This observed axogenesis is in line with previous studies
describing the hypertrophic response of OECs on axonal regrowth
(Raisman and Li, 2007). For example, it is known that OECs i) inhibit
hypertrophic response of host astrocyte (Santos-Silva et al., 2007), ii)
reduce the expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPG) in
reactive astrocytes (Lakatos et al., 2000), iii) limit the size of cavities
(Richter et al., 2005), iv) create a tube-like structure and provide a
bridge for lesioned axons (Li et al., 2004; Sasaki et al., 2004), and v)
enhance angiogenesis (Richter et al., 2005). In line with these
previously published data on the consequences of OECs grafting, we
found here that nasal OECs reduce cystic size cavities which probably
could create a bridge and thus could enhance axonal regrowth.
Altogether, these studies demonstrate that OECs, from bulbar or nasal
origin, provide a positive environment for injured axons probably by
regulating the cellular and molecular events forming the glial scar. To
date, there is no a single antigen recognized as an unambiguous
marker of this cell type. As a consequence, it was not possible to
ascertain that our cultures were free of other cell types. We have
shown that, in our culture conditions, we were able to get pure
populations (up to 98%) of cells expressing GFAP and S100 (Bianco
et al., 2004). Nevertheless, it cannot be excluded that some of the stem
cells residing in the lamina propria (Delorme et al., 2010), which may
express these two proteins, were present in our culture dishes.
In order to assess survival and migration of transplanted cells, we
permanently transfected them with the gene coding for the
fluorescent protein GFP, using a lentivirus. As routinely observed in
our lab with human cells (Delorme et al., 2010), about half of the rat
cells were successfully transfected, after 1 day in the appropriate
culture medium. However, a few days later, we observed that GFP
expression was transient and we could not get high numbers of cells
5 months post-contusion. A: Typical phrenic activity in MEDIUM and OEC-transplanted
grated trace (Int PN). B: Typical left and right phrenic responses from four MEDIUM and
on the left and right side of the spinal cord (C1 level), respectively. In each trace, 4
icate responses of OEC left phrenic responses. C and D: Bar graphs indicate the level of
(D). Left phrenic nerve activity normalised to the right phrenic nerve activity. Statistical
0.01.
Fig. 5. Effect of acute additional sections on phrenic nerve activities of MEDIUM and OEC-grafted rats 3.5 months post-contusion. A and B: Typical phrenic spontaneous activity in
MEDIUM (A) and OEC-transplanted rats (B), before and after acute sections, is reported. Each phrenic nerve activity includes the spontaneous trace (PN) and the integrated trace (Int
PN). The drawing represents a dorso-longitudinal view of the cervical spinal cord, with the contusion injury site indicated by a large black dot and the horizontal black line represents
the extent of C1 acute sections (contralateral right medial, right complete or complete section). C: Plot graph reports the remaining right and left nerve activities of MEDIUM and
OEC-transplanted rats, after various acute C1 sections (n=3). Statistical comparison was performed using a two-way ANOVA test. Error bars represent SEM. **: p valueb0.01.
128 J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
Fig. 6. Assessment of axon sprouting within the lesion site 3.5 months post-contusion. A: Longitudinal sections were immunostained with anti-GFAP and anti-neurofilament (NF)
antibodies. Views of ipsilateral (injured side) and corresponding contralateral (non-injured) sides indicate that neuronal fibers are detected in the ventrolateral and ventromedial
part of the spinal cord of OEC-grafted rats (arrows) and not in MEDIUM animals. B: Longitudinal sections were immunostained with anti-5-HT antibody. High numbers of 5-HT-
positive axons with varicosities (arrowheads) were found in the OEC group, when compared to the MEDIUM group. Scale bar: 100 μm. C: The area of cystic cavity formed after injury
is significantly reduced after OEC transplantation (n=4; *: p valueb0.05). D and E: Fluorescence densitometries for NF-positive (D) and 5-HT-positive (E) pixels, within the lesion
site, reveal significantly greater NF and 5-HT immunoreactivity after OEC transplantation (n=4; **: p valueb0.01). Data are presented as mean±SEM.
129J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
130 J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131with a stable GFP expression before transplantation.We think that the
lentiviral vector itself was not packaged properly or has not integrated
the genome
In regard to locomotor recovery after SCI, it is worth mentioning
that several studies have reported an increase of 5-HT immunoreac-
tive axons following engraftment of OEC or embryonic cells (Fouad
et al., 2005; Lopez-Vales et al., 2006; Lopez-Vales et al., 2007; Lu et al.,
2001; Ramon-Cueto et al., 1998; Richter et al., 2005). These results
suggest a regeneration of the raphe-spinal pathway. Some studies
report that 5-HT-positive axons and occasionally interneurons can be
found in the caudal stump after a spinal cord section (Kubasak et al.,
2008; Newton et al., 1986; Takeoka et al., 2009). In our contusion
model, we failed to detect 5-HT cell bodies or immunoreactive axons
crossing the midline of the spinal cord. However, in the OECs rats,
immunoreactive axons were found to be rostro-caudally oriented,
with a high number of fibers in the rostral stumpwithin the contusion
site. These findings support the hypothesis that OECs would not
necessarily contribute to the remodeling of propiospinal 5-HT
interneurons but would rather induce central pathway regeneration
and/or non-injured descending axons sprouting.
Such a central descending pathway reorganization could originate
from 5HT raphe-spinal neuronswhich are known to directly innervate
phrenic motoneurons and participate in respiratory plasticity during
intermittent hypoxia (Baker-Herman et al., 2004; Dobbins and
Feldman, 1994).
In conclusion, the current study provides, for a specific motor
function (respiration), new evidence that nasal OEC transplantation
can induce a partial recovery of respiratory function of the diaphragm
following an injury of the cervical cord. Our results could have clinical
implications as a potential treatment of the ventilator-dependent
tetraplegic patients.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the Institute pour la Recherche sur la
Moelle Epinière et l'Encéphale (IRME, Paris, France), Association
Française contre les Myopathies (AFM, Paris, France) and Paul Cézanne
University (Marseille, France). M.S. Félix was supported by a fellowship
from the French Minister for Research and Technology. We thank the
imaging facility of the Institut Français de Recherche Jean Roche and
Patrick Sanchez (CNRS, France) for software design. The authors
gratefully acknowledge Dr. Teresa Trippenbach (McGill University,
Canada) for her helpful advice and critical review of the manuscript.
References
Baker-Herman, T.L., Fuller, D.D., Bavis, R.W., Zabka, A.G., Golder, F.J., Doperalski, N.J.,
Johnson, R.A., Watters, J.J., Mitchell, G.S., 2004. BDNF is necessary and sufficient for
spinal respiratory plasticity following intermittent hypoxia. Nat. Neurosci. 7,
48–55.
Baussart, B., Stamegna, J.C., Polentes, J., Tadie, M., Gauthier, P., 2006. A new model of
upper cervical spinal contusion inducing a persistent unilateral diaphragmatic
deficit in the adult rat. Neurobiol. Dis. 22, 562–574.
Berlly, M., Shem, K., 2007. Respiratory management during the first five days after
spinal cord injury. J. Spinal Cord Med. 30, 309–318.
Bianco, J.I., Perry, C., Harkin, D.G., Mackay-Sim, A., Feron, F., 2004. Neurotrophin 3
promotes purification and proliferation of olfactory ensheathing cells from human
nose. Glia 45, 111–123.
Bock, P., Beineke, A., Techangamsuwan, S., Baumgartner, W., Wewetzer, K., 2007.
Differential expression of HNK-1 and p75(NTR) in adult canine Schwann cells and
olfactory ensheathing cells in situ but not in vitro. J. Comp. Neurol. 505, 572–585.
Bohlman, H.H., Anderson, P.A., 1992. Anterior decompression and arthrodesis of the
cervical spine: long-term motor improvement. Part I–Improvement in incomplete
traumatic quadriparesis. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 74, 671–682.
Brown, R., DiMarco, A.F., Hoit, J.D., Garshick, E., 2006. Respiratory dysfunction and
management in spinal cord injury. Respir. Care 51, 853–868 discussion 869-870.
Delorme, B., Nivet, E., Gaillard, J., Haupl, T., Ringe, J., Deveze, A., Magnan, J., Sohier, J.,
Khrestchatisky, M., Roman, F.S., Charbord, P., Sensebe, L., Layrolle, P., Feron, F., 2010.
The human nose harbors a niche of olfactory ectomesenchymal stem cells
displaying neurogenic and osteogenic properties. Stem Cells Dev. 19, 853–866.Dobbins, E.G., Feldman, J.L., 1994. Brainstem network controlling descending drive to
phrenic motoneurons in rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 347, 64–86.
Feron, F., Perry, C., McGrath, J.J., Mackay-Sim, A., 1998. New techniques for biopsy and
culture of human olfactory epithelial neurons. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg.
124, 861–866.
Feron, F., Perry, C., Cochrane, J., Licina, P., Nowitzke, A., Urquhart, S., Geraghty, T.,
Mackay-Sim, A., 2005. Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation in
human spinal cord injury. Brain 128, 2951–2960.
Fouad, K., Schnell, L., Bunge, M.B., Schwab, M.E., Liebscher, T., Pearse, D.D., 2005.
Combining Schwann cell bridges and olfactory-ensheathing glia grafts with
chondroitinase promotes locomotor recovery after complete transection of the
spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 25, 1169–1178.
Fuller, D.D., Doperalski, N.J., Dougherty, B.J., Sandhu, M.S., Bolser, D.C., Reier, P.J., 2008.
Modest spontaneous recovery of ventilation following chronic high cervical
hemisection in rats. Exp. Neurol. 211, 97–106.
Gauthier, P., Monteau, R., 1986. Respiratory resetting induced by activation of
inspiratory bulbo-spinal neurons. Respir. Physiol. 65, 155–168.
Golder, F.J., Fuller, D.D., Davenport, P.W., Johnson, R.D., Reier, P.J., Bolser, D.C., 2003.
Respiratory motor recovery after unilateral spinal cord injury: eliminating crossed
phrenic activity decreases tidal volume and increases contralateral respiratory
motor output. J. Neurosci. 23, 2494–2501.
Goshgarian, H.G., 2003. The crossed phrenic phenomenon: a model for plasticity in the
respiratory pathways following spinal cord injury. J. Appl. Physiol. 94, 795–810.
Jackson, A.B., Dijkers, M., Devivo, M.J., Poczatek, R.B., 2004. A demographic profile of
new traumatic spinal cord injuries: change and stability over 30 years. Arch. Phys.
Med. Rehabil. 85, 1740–1748.
Kocsis, J.D., Lankford, K.L., Sasaki, M., Radtke, C., 2009. Unique in vivo properties of
olfactory ensheathing cells that may contribute to neural repair and protection
following spinal cord injury. Neurosci. Lett. 456, 137–142.
Kubasak, M.D., Jindrich, D.L., Zhong, H., Takeoka, A., McFarland, K.C., Munoz-Quiles, C.,
Roy, R.R., Edgerton, V.R., Ramon-Cueto, A., Phelps, P.E., 2008. OEG implantation and
step training enhance hindlimb-stepping ability in adult spinal transected rats.
Brain 131, 264–276.
Lakatos, A., Franklin, R.J., Barnett, S.C., 2000. Olfactory ensheathing cells and Schwann
cells differ in their in vitro interactions with astrocytes. Glia 32, 214–225.
Li, Y., Carlstedt, T., Berthold, C.H., Raisman, G., 2004. Interaction of transplanted
olfactory-ensheathing cells and host astrocytic processes provides a bridge for
axons to regenerate across the dorsal root entry zone. Exp. Neurol. 188, 300–308.
Lipski, J., Zhang, X., Kruszewska, B., Kanjhan, R., 1994. Morphological study of long axonal
projectionsof ventralmedullary inspiratory neurons in the rat. Brain Res. 640, 171–184.
Lopez-Vales, R., Fores, J., Navarro, X., Verdu, E., 2006. Olfactory ensheathing glia graft in
combination with FK506 administration promote repair after spinal cord injury.
Neurobiol. Dis. 24, 443–454.
Lopez-Vales, R., Fores, J., Navarro, X., Verdu, E., 2007. Chronic transplantation of
olfactory ensheathing cells promotes partial recovery after complete spinal cord
transection in the rat. Glia 55, 303–311.
Lu, J., Feron, F., Ho, S.M., Mackay-Sim, A., Waite, P.M., 2001. Transplantation of nasal
olfactory tissue promotes partial recovery in paraplegic adult rats. Brain Res. 889,
344–357.
Mackay-Sim, A., Feron, F., Cochrane, J., Bassingthwaighte, L., Bayliss, C., Davies, W.,
Fronek, P., Gray, C., Kerr, G., Licina, P., Nowitzke, A., Perry, C., Silburn, P.A., Urquhart,
S., Geraghty, T., 2008. Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation in
human paraplegia: a 3 year clinical trial. Brain 131, 2376–2386.
Martini, R., Schachner, M., Brushart, T.M., 1994. The L2/HNK-1 carbohydrate is
preferentially expressed by previously motor axon-associated Schwann cells in
reinnervated peripheral nerves. J. Neurosci. 14, 7180–7191.
Newton, B.W., Maley, B.E., Hamill, R.W., 1986. Immunohistochemical demonstration of
serotoninneurons inautonomic regions of the rat spinal cord. BrainRes. 376, 155–163.
Peyronnet, J., Roux, J.C., Geloen, A., Tang, L.Q., Pequignot, J.M., Lagercrantz, H., Dalmaz,
Y., 2000. Prenatal hypoxia impairs the postnatal development of neural and
functional chemoafferent pathway in rat. J. Physiol. 524 (Pt 2), 525–537.
Polentes, J., Stamegna, J.C., Nieto-Sampedro, M., Gauthier, P., 2004. Phrenic rehabili-
tation and diaphragm recovery after cervical injury and transplantation of olfactory
ensheathing cells. Neurobiol. Dis. 16, 638–653.
Raisman, G., Li, Y., 2007. Repair of neural pathways by olfactory ensheathing cells. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 312–319.
Ramer, L.M., Au, E., Richter, M.W., Liu, J., Tetzlaff, W., Roskams, A.J., 2004. Peripheral
olfactory ensheathing cells reduce scar and cavity formation and promote
regeneration after spinal cord injury. J. Comp. Neurol. 473, 1–15.
Ramon-Cueto, A., Nieto-Sampedro, M., 1994. Regeneration into the spinal cord of
transected dorsal root axons is promoted by ensheathing glia transplants. Exp.
Neurol. 127, 232–244.
Ramon-Cueto, A., Plant, G.W., Avila, J., Bunge, M.B., 1998. Long-distance axonal
regeneration in the transected adult rat spinal cord is promoted by olfactory
ensheathing glia transplants. J. Neurosci. 18, 3803–3815.
Richter, M.W., Roskams, A.J., 2008. Olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation following
spinal cord injury: hype or hope? Exp. Neurol. 209, 353–367.
Richter, M.W., Fletcher, P.A., Liu, J., Tetzlaff, W., Roskams, A.J., 2005. Lamina propria and
olfactory bulb ensheathing cells exhibit differential integration and migration and
promote differential axon sprouting in the lesioned spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 25,
10700–10711.
Saito, H., Nakao, Y., Takayama, S., Toyama, Y., Asou, H., 2005. Specific expression of an
HNK-1 carbohydrate epitope and NCAM on femoral nerve Schwann cells in mice.
Neurosci. Res. 53, 314–322.
Santos-Silva, A., Fairless, R., Frame, M.C., Montague, P., Smith, G.M., Toft, A., Riddell, J.S.,
Barnett, S.C., 2007. FGF/heparin differentially regulates Schwann cell and olfactory
ensheathing cell interactions with astrocytes: a role in astrocytosis. J. Neurosci. 27,
7154–7167.
Sasaki, M., Lankford, K.L., Zemedkun, M., Kocsis, J.D., 2004. Identified olfactory
ensheathing cells transplanted into the transected dorsal funiculus bridge the
lesion and form myelin. J. Neurosci. 24, 8485–8493.
Speck, D.F., 1988. Respiratory resetting induced by spinal cord stimulation in the cat.
J. Appl. Physiol. 65, 1572–1578.
Takeoka, A., Kubasak, M.D., Zhong, H., Roy, R.R., Phelps, P.E., 2009. Serotonergic
innervation of the caudal spinal stump in rats after complete spinal transection:
effect of olfactory ensheathing glia. J. Comp. Neurol. 515, 664–676.
Tian, D.S., Dong, Q., Pan, D.J., He, Y., Yu, Z.Y., Xie, M.J., Wang, W., 2007. Attenuation
of astrogliosis by suppressing of microglial proliferation with the cell cycle
inhibitor olomoucine in rat spinal cord injury model. Brain Res. 1154,
206–214.
131J.C. Stamegna et al. / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 120–131
