:inal cord injury although this whole tissue contains many cells in addition to
. . .
sa and
lfactory
ng cells
d spina
transpl
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental
.e lIntroduction
Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) surround the axons of the
sensory neurons whose cell bodies lie in the olfactory epithelium in
the nose and which synapse in the specialised glomeruli of the
olfactory bulb in the brain (Fig. 1). As the axons grow out through the
basal layer of the epithelium, they penetrate the basement membrane
the cribriform plate (Fig. 1C). The nerve bundles then penetrate the
coverings of the brain to run across the surface of the olfactory bulb
forming its outer layer, the nerve fibre layer (Fig. 1C) (Au et al., 2002).
Within this layer the olfactory axons defasciculate, turning deeper
into the bulb to enter the glomeruli where they form synapses with
mitral cells and interneurons (Shipley and Ennis, 1996) (Fig. 1C). OECs
are in close association with the axons from their entry into theand enter the lamina propria where they
bundles that are ensheathed by OECs (Fig. 1B
These nerve bundles run through the lam
fasciculate into multiple larger nerve bundles
⁎ Corresponding author. Fax: +61 7 3735 4255.
E-mail address: a.mackay-sim@griffith.edu.au (A. M
0014-4886/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. Al
doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.08.025sa in human spinal cord injury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
hat is the future for clinical trials? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178Autologous transplantation of olfactory muco
Olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation: wContents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
Olfactory ensheathing cells from muco
The trigeminal nerve innervates the o
Clinical sources of olfactory ensheathi
Mucosal olfactory ensheathing cells an
Autologous olfactory ensheathing cellreach general clinical application. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Understanding olfactory
ensheathing glia and their prospect for nervous system repair.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
bulb are different . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
mucosa and olfactory bulb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
for human trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
l cord repair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
antation in human spinal cord injury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177coalesce to form axon
) (Chuah and Au, 1991).
ina propria where they
to penetrate the skull at
lamina propria in
glomeruli within
In most ma
chemosensory o
chemosensory o
the accessory ol
(Halpern and Mackay-Sim).
l rights reserved.ant practical issues that will need to be solved before they
Cell transplantation
Cell therapyolfactory ensheathing cells, including stem cells. If olfactory ensheathing cells are proven therapeutic for
human spinal cord injury there are several importHuman investigated in traumatic spOlfactory ensheathing glia
Spinal cord repair recorded for three years follNational Centre for Adult Stem Cell Research, Eskitis Institute for Cell and Molecular Therapies, Griffith Unversity, Brisbane, QLD 4111, Australia
a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 28 May 2010
Accepted 22 August 2010
Available online 9 September 2010
Keywords:
Olfactory epithelium
Olfactory mucosa, the sense organ of smell, is an adult tissue that is regenerated and repaired throughout life
to maintain the integrity of the sense of smell. When the sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium die they
are replaced by proliferation of stem cells and their axons grow from the nose to brain assisted by olfactory
ensheathing cells located in the lamina propria beneath the sensory epithelium. When transplanted into the
site of traumatic spinal cord injury in rat, olfactory lamina propria or purified olfactory ensheathing cells
promote behavioural recovery and assist regrowth of some nerves in the spinal cord. A Phase I clinical trial
demonstrated that autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation is safe, with no adverse outcomes
owing transplantation. Autologous olfactory mucosa transplantation is also beingReview
Olfactory ensheathing cells from the nose
cord injuries
Alan Mackay-Sim ⁎, James A. St John
j ourna l homepage: wwwClinical application in human spinal
Neurology
sev ie r.com/ locate /yexnrthe peripheral nervous system until their entry into
the olfactory bulb of the central nervous system.
mmals the olfactory epithelium is not the only
rgan in the nose. The vomeronasal organ is a separate
rgan whose axons project in distinct nerve bundles to
factory bulb at the caudal end of the olfactory bulb
artinez-Marcos, 2003). There are two additional
use
whic
lia a
m th
and
fact
DsR
roun
ity
he o
f the
175A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180specialised patches of olfactory sensory neurons on the nasal septum:
the septal organ of Grüneberg, located close to the entrance of the
nasal cavity and the septal organ ofMasera, located ventrally (Fig. 1A).
Axons from these sensory neurons terminate in specialised glomeruli
located at the caudal end of the olfactory bulb (Pedersen and Benson,
1986; Storan and Key, 2006). It is possible that the OECs from these
various chemosensory epithelia are different, providing a heteroge-
neity in preparations from the olfactory mucosa and bulb. The adult
human nose only has an olfactory epithelium so the OEC population
derived from the nasal epithelium is probably homogeneous.
Isolating OECs from the mucosa or bulb requires separation from
the many potential “contaminating” cells. The olfactory epithelium
contains sensory neurons, supporting cells, basal stem and progenitor
cells, and Bowman's gland duct cells which are separated from the
lamina propria beneath by a basementmembrane (Moran et al., 1982;
Fig. 1. Olfactory neurons and olfactory ensheathing cells in the nose and brain. A: A mo
Anterior is to the right. Dorsal is up. The mouse is a transgenic strain (OMP-ZsGreen)
protein (OMP) that is expressed by all olfactory sensory neurons. Chemosensory epithe
(om). The septal organ of Grüneberg is out of view to the right. The nerves emanating fro
olfactory mucosa. The olfactory nerves form the outer layer of the olfactory bulb (ob)
Section through the olfactory mucosa showing the olfactory epithelium (oe) and the ol
OMP-ZsGreen strain and the S100ß-DsRed strain (in which the red fluorescent protein,
while OECs and Schwann cells are red. Arrow points to a green olfactory nerve bundle sur
red Schwann cells. Such nerve bundles are uncommon. C: Section through the nasal cav
through the skull at the cribriform plate (cp) to synapse in the glomerular layer (gl) of t
layer (nfl) of the olfactory bulb. DsRed is expressed also by chondrocytes in the bone oMorrison and Costanzo, 1990). Beneath the epithelium in the
olfactory lamina propria are the olfactory nerve bundles, which are
composed of axons and the surrounding OECs, but also Bowman's
glands, blood vessels, trigeminal nerve fibres and the interstitial
fibroblasts and tissue resident immune cells. The outer layer of the
olfactory bulb comprises the olfactory nervewith attendant ensheath-
ing cells, but cell preparations will also contain a small number of
interfascicular astrocytes (Doucette, 1993), fibroblasts from the
perineurium and meninges, as well as cells of the vasculature.
The olfactory system is perhaps the most plastic part of the adult
nervous system. Throughout development and adult life, neurogen-
esis continues to occur in the olfactory epithelium in the nose where
stem cells in the basal layer of the epithelium proliferate to generate
new sensory neurons (Graziadei and Monti Graziadei, 1979; Leung
et al., 2007; Mackay-Sim and Kittel, 1991). Within the central nervous
system, proliferation of stem cells in the subventricular zone of the
forebrain generates neural progenitors that migrate forward into the
olfactory bulb to generate new interneurons throughout development
and into adulthood (Curtis et al., 2007; Lledo et al., 2008). Severing
the olfactory nerve leads to apoptosis of the sensory neurons in the
epithelium which are then replaced quickly by new neurons arising
from enhanced neurogenesis as demonstrated in many studies,
including in primate (Graziadei and Graziadei, 1979; Graziadei
et al., 1980). The remarkable ability for continual axon growth and
successful targeting is attributed to the presence of the glia associated
with the olfactory nerve since the OECs accompany the axons from theepithelium through the olfactory bulb in the brain (Chuah and Zheng,
1992). The combination of assisting in axon growth and associating
with the central nervous system has made OECs candidates for
assisting in repair of injury to the brain and spinal cord (Li et al., 1998;
Ramon-Cueto et al., 2000; Smale et al., 1996).
The adult human olfactory mucosa, unlike rat and other mammals,
is not contiguous but patchily distributed and interspersed with
respiratory mucosa in the upper nasal cavity (Moran et al., 1982;
Morrison and Costanzo, 1990; Nakashima et al., 1984; Paik et al.,
1992). Olfactory mucosa can be detected more anteriorly and
inferiorly in the adult human nose than in the fetus (Feron et al.,
1998; Leopold et al., 2000). Consequently, “olfactorymucosa biopsies”
from adult humans will virtually always contain respiratory mucosa.
Biopsies will therefore contain many cell types in addition to OECs:
cells of the olfactory epithelium (horizontal basal cells, globose basal
head longitudinally dissected to expose the lateral nasal cavity and anterior forebrain.
h has a green fluorescent protein (ZsGreen) under the promoter for olfactory marker
re identified: olfactory epithelium (oe), vomeronasal organ (vno), and organ of Masera
e om and vno can be seen passing under the unlabelled respiratory mucosa and into the
the vomeronasal nerves form the outer layer of the accessory olfactory bulb (aob). B:
ory lamina propria beneath (lp). The mouse is a transgenic strain, a cross between the
ed, is under the S100ß promoter). Olfactory sensory neurons and their axons are green
ded by red OECs. Arrowheads point to nerve bundles, presumed trigeminal nerves with
and skull showing the olfactory sensory neurons of the mucosa sending nerve bundles
lfactory bulb. The olfactory nerves with associated OECs form the superficial nerve fibre
skull. Scale bar is 850 μm in A; 50 μm in B; and 120 μm in C.cells; olfactory sensory neurons, supporting cells, and Bowman's
glands duct cells), cells of the respiratory epithelium (ciliated cells,
and goblet cells), and cells of the lamina propriae (Bowman's gland
cells, fibroblasts, tissue macrophages, vascular cells, and Schwann
cells of the trigeminal nerve). There will be stem cells of the olfactory
epithelium (i.e the horizontal basal cells) (Carter et al., 2004; Leung
et al., 2007; Mackay-Sim and Kittel, 1991; Roisen et al., 2001) and a
multipotent stem cell in the lamina propria capable of differentiating
into numerous non-olfactory cell types (Feron et al., 2009; Murrell
et al., 2005; Tome et al., 2009) and with some characteristics of
mesenchymal stem cells (Feron et al., 2009).
Olfactory ensheathing cells from mucosa and bulb are different
OECs from the olfactory nerve and olfactory bulb are not identical.
Mucosal OECs express several antigens not expressed by bulb OECs
(Au and Roskams, 2003); they differ in their ability to grow in vitro
(Jani and Raisman, 2004), and they differ in their reparative effects
when transplanted into the injured spinal cord (Richter et al., 2005).
There is also heterogeneity among OECs of the olfactory bulb. The
olfactory nerve layer in the bulb is subdivided into two layers within
which the OECs express S100 but only the outer layer OECs express
p75 (Au et al., 2002). We have also observed functional heterogeneity
in OECs from different regions of the bulb and the olfactory nerve in
the epithelium (Windus et al., 2010). Those in the mucosa mainly
interact with each other by adhesion and they cause olfactory sensory
176 A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180axons to fasciculate. OECs from the bulb show heterogeneous
interactions with each other — either adhesion or repulsion or
neither; and axons growing on the bulb-derived OECs do not form
fascicles (Windus et al., 2010). The proportion of cells demonstrating
these behaviours varied depending on the region of the olfactory bulb
(dorsal/ventral, and rostral/caudal) from which they were derived
(Windus et al., 2010). We also noted functional differences in the
OECs from the olfactory bulbs of embryonic, postnatal and adult
olfactory bulbs (Windus et al., 2010).
OECs also showheterogeneitywhengrowing in vitro (Pixley, 1992).
It is now established that this heterogeneity is reflective of plasticity in
morphology and antigen expression that can be manipulated by
growth conditions (Huang et al., 2008; Vincent et al., 2003). When
monitored with time-lapse imaging, cells of each morphology are seen
to change into the other during the course of an hour in a different
growth medium (Huang et al., 2008). The most spindle-shaped OECs
migrated three times faster than themost flattened OECs (Huang et al.,
2008) so morphology may reflect a different functional state.
In summary, these studies demonstrate heterogeneity in mor-
phology, antigen expression and function in OECs from olfactory
mucosa and olfactory bulb, at developmental stages and under
different culture conditions. There may be species differences as
well (Smithson and Kawaja, 2009). These are all variables that will
confound any comparison of outcomes of transplanting “olfactory
ensheathing cells” into the injured spinal cord. It would be wise not to
assume all authors are using the same cells.
The trigeminal nerve innervates the olfactory mucosa and
olfactory bulb
The trigeminal nerve innervates the olfactory and respiratory
mucosae, providing touch and pain sensations within the nasal cavity,
as well as chemosensitivity. This nerve also innervates the olfactory
bulb with some neurons branching to innervate mucosa and bulb
(Finger and Bottger, 1993; Schaefer et al., 2002; Silver and Finger,
2009). Non-myelinated trigeminal motor nerves innervate blood
vessels to regulate blood flow within the mucosa and myelinated
sensory nerves are also present (Herrera et al., 2005; Kawaja et al.,
2009). Hence it is possible that preparations of “olfactory ensheathing
cells” from the olfactory mucosa and olfactory bulb could also contain
Schwann cells from the trigeminal nerve (Rizek and Kawaja, 2006).
Compared to the number and size of olfactory nerve bundles in the
lamina propria and olfactory bulb, trigeminal innervation of the
olfactory mucosa and bulb is sparse (Fig. 1B). There has not been a
systematic comparison to quantify this but the proportion of OECs in
any cell culture from the olfactory mucosa is expected to be far larger
than the proportion of trigeminal Schwann cells. The difficulty for
researchers is in distinguishing these two cell types in vitro because
they both express p75, GFAP and S100. Proteomics analysis identified
two potential antigens expressed by OECs and not Schwann cells,
namely calponin and smooth muscle actin (Boyd et al., 2006; Jahed
et al., 2007). However, those findings were dependent on the purity of
the cultures and calponin has subsequently been localised to olfactory
mucosa fibroblasts and olfactory bulb meningeal cells, not OECs
(Ibanez et al., 2007). Fibroblasts also express smooth muscle actin
(Jahed et al., 2007) so this antigen is also shared with potential
contaminants of OEC cultures.
In order to assess Schwann cell contribution to OEC cultures we
have previously looked for an antigen expressed by Schwann cells but
not OECs. HNK-1 is an antigen expressed by myelinating Schwann
cells in human andmouse sciatic nerve (Levi et al., 1994; Martini et al.,
1988) and by myelinating and non-myelinating Schwann cells in
canine trigeminal nerve (Bock et al., 2007). Since rat olfactory bulb
OECs do not express HNK-1 in vitro (Barnett et al., 1993), we used
HNK-1 immunogenicity to distinguish OECs from Schwann cells in rat
and human cultures from olfactory mucosa to demonstrate thattrigeminal Schwann cells but notmucosal OECs expressed this antigen
in vitro (Bianco et al., 2004; Feron et al., 2005). Contrary to these
studies it is argued that while HNK-1 is expressed in vivo by canine
Schwann cells, it is not expressed in vitro (Bock et al., 2007) so the
general utility of HNK-1 antigenicity remains unresolved because of
species differences and culture methods.
It is well understood that defined media can be very selective for
the cell types whose growth they support. We identified that a
minimal serum-free medium containing NT3 was capable of expand-
ing and purifying OECs from rat and human olfactory mucosa (Bianco
et al., 2004; Feron et al., 2005). This medium is selective for OECs
because it does not support long-term culture of Schwann cells
beyond 24 h (Cheng et al., 1998; Levi et al., 1994; Lobsiger et al.,
2000). In many laboratories the culture medium contains either fetal
calf serum or one of the neuregulins whichwill support both OECs and
Schwann cells (Bock et al., 2007; Rizek and Kawaja, 2006).
In summary, it is probably wise to assume that all OEC cultures
may contain a small proportion of trigeminal Schwann cells unless
proven otherwise. As discussed it is very difficult to distinguish the
two cell types in vitro but certain culture conditions may be selective
for OECs. This potential contamination with Schwann cells applies
equally to OECs from mucosa and bulb but in both cases the
proportion of Schwann cells is probably low. This is supported
indirectly by reports of differences in gene and protein expression
between OEC cultures and sciatic Schwann cell cultures (Boyd et al.,
2006; Vincent et al., 2005). Differences would not be observed if there
was significant Schwann cell contamination of OEC cultures.
From a pragmatic perspective for clinical application, cells will
need to be grown according to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
protocols. They must be produced under very strict standards of
quality control and comply with defined specifications, such as
percentages of cells with particular immunophenotypes. Ultimately,
the “purity” of the transplanted OECs is less important than a defined
method of cell culture and high level of quality control to produce a
predictable cell population with therapeutic efficacy. If well defined
cells are generated from olfactory mucosa biopsies and they are
effective clinically it may not matter from a regulatory perspective if
they are “pure” OECs or are contaminated with a small percentage of
trigeminal Schwann cells.
Clinical sources of olfactory ensheathing cells for human trials
There are almost as many descriptions of OEC preparations as
there are laboratories exploring their biology (Kawaja et al., 2009).
These differences should be consideredwhen comparing the results of
different laboratories describing OEC biology and function, including
their therapeutic efficacy when transplanted into the injured spinal
cord. They should also be considered when choosing sources for
human therapies.
Without going into details that are covered elsewhere it can be said
that the differences in OEC preparations differ along many dimensions.
Sources vary — most studies use olfactory bulb preparations but an
increasing number use olfactory mucosa. Of those that use olfactory
bulb preparations, some use the nerve fibre layer from the entire
olfactory bulb (Li et al., 1997; Lopez-Vales et al., 2006; Ramon-Cueto
et al., 2000; Ramon-Cueto et al., 1998) whereas others use only the
nerve fibre layer from the rostral olfactory bulb (Lankford et al., 2008),
or ventral olfactory bulb (Guest et al., 2008), or others do not specify the
exact region (Teng et al., 2008). Developmental stage varies —
embryonic, postnatal and adult tissues have been used. Species vary —
most research is on rat but mouse, canine, cat, guinea pig, and human
OECs have been investigated. Selection methods vary — some use
differential adhesion, some use immunopanning/FACS/MACS for
p75NTR/O4; many do not select. Dissociation methods vary— different
enzymes, different mechanical dissociation. Culture methods vary —
presence of serum, composition of defined media, different growth
177A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180factors. Verification methods vary — 69 antigens have been used to
identify OECs (Kawaja et al., 2009). The most commonly accepted
markers are p75NTR, S100 and GFAP which are used to verify the
relative purity of the resultant OEC cultures. A combination of these
markers can eliminate all the potential contaminating cells from
olfactory mucosa and bulb cell cultures except trigeminal Schwann
cells, as discussed earlier.
For clinical application, OECs could be obtained from either the
olfactory mucosa or the olfactory bulb. They could be obtained from
the same patient, i.e. autologously, or from autopsy tissue for
heterologous transplantation. Autologous transplantation is perhaps
the most clinically acceptable method for transplantation because it
avoids immune rejection. OECs from the peripheral olfactory nerve
can be easily obtained from biopsies of human olfactory mucosa
(Bianco et al., 2004; Feron et al., 1998) and enough cells for
autologous transplantation can be obtained by culturing for 4–
6 weeks (Feron et al., 2005). Another approach is to remove the
olfactory bulb unilaterally through the nasal bone and orbit as
demonstrated in primate (Rubio et al., 2008). This procedure is riskier
than a nasal biopsy, with higher morbidity including the risk of CSF
leak through the surgical entry into the skull, and will have a negative
impact on the patient since it would eliminate olfaction unilaterally.
Nasal biopsy from the medial and lateral walls of the nasal cavity does
not pose a risk of CSF leaks and does not affect the sense of smell
(Feron et al., 1998; Lanza et al., 1994). Despite these comparative
risks, if bulbar OECs prove clinically superior to nasal cells, then the
risk of bulb biopsy may be warranted.
In the acute stages of spinal cord injury, clinical use of autologous
cells is not possible because of the time required to generate and
culture the cells (Feron et al., 2005; Rubio et al., 2008). If acute
application is required then heterologous transplantation would be
necessary. One approach would be to immortalize cells from a single
person that could serve as a ready source for many spinal injured
patients (Lim et al., 2010), although this would require immune
suppression. Another approach would be to develop a bank of OECs
with appropriate HLA subtypes for cell transplantation.
Whatever the source of OECs, the regulations in most countries
require that cells used for transplantation must be produced under
GMP protocols. These regulations would differentially affect the
relative costs of autologous or heterologous cell transplantation. In
both cases the batch of cells to be transplanted requires defined
properties of identification and microbiological non-contamination.
The per-patient costs of GMP production and certification could be
reduced for banked cells by using them for multiple patients but the
costs to establish such a bank would be very high. For banked cells the
treatment costs per-patient would be increased if immuno-suppres-
sive drugs were required.
Mucosal olfactory ensheathing cells and spinal cord repair
The early evidence for the therapeutic efficacy of OEC transplan-
tation used cells obtained from the olfactory bulb of embryonic or
very young rats (Li et al., 1998; Ramon-Cueto et al., 1998). For clinical
use, autologous transplantation of nasal OECs is most desirable so it
was necessary to discover whether OECs from the olfactory mucosa
could also promote recovery when transplanted into the injured
spinal cord and also to discover whether the use of OECs from adult
animals was effective. In our initial experiments in adult rats, we
transplanted pieces of olfactory lamina propria into the transected
spinal cord and we demonstrated that improved locomotion was
achieved with evidence that descending axons from brainstem motor
nuclei had crossed the injury and transplant site and entered the
spinal cord cuadal to the injury site (Lu et al., 2001). Because the
olfactory lamina propria contains many cells other than OECs, as a
control we transplanted pieces of respiratory lamina propria and
found that this failed to promote locomotor recovery and therewas noevidence for axon growth in the spinal cord (Lu et al., 2001). Semi-
purified OEC cultures were similarly effective as pieces of olfactory
lamina propria (Lu et al., 2001). Transplantation of cells into an acute
spinal cord injury places them into the early phases of the inflammed
tissue and delayed transplantation may be more beneficial. As an
initial test of delayed transplantation we grafted pieces of olfactory
lamina propria into the injured spinal cord 3 weeks after complete
transection (Lu et al., 2002). This also promoted functional recovery,
with descending brainstem motor axons growing through the injury
site and into the caudal spinal cord (Lu et al., 2002). Such recoverywas
not evident with delayed transplantation of respiratory lamina
propria (Lu et al., 2002).
Transplantation of whole olfactory mucosa, which includes
olfactory epithelium as well as lamina propria, also improved
functional recovery after spinal cord injury (Iwatsuki et al., 2008).
Transplantation of human neural progenitors from olfactory epithe-
lium was also effective in a rat model of spinal cord injury (Xiao et al.,
2005), so there may be more than one source of cells with therapeutic
potential in the olfactory mucosa. For example we demonstrated that
a multipotent stem cell in rodent and human olfactory mucosa was
capable of differentiating into neurons and glia as well as many other
non-neural cell types in vitro and after transplantation into embryos
(Murrell et al., 2005).
Olfactory mucosa OECs transplanted into dorsal column lesions in
rodent promoted migration of host Schwann cells into the lesion to
reduce the scar and lesion cavity and promoted regeneration of
sensory and motor axons into and through the lesion (Ramer et al.,
2004). Interestingly, the olfactorymucosa OECswere superior in these
respects compared to olfactory bulb OECs (Richter et al., 2005). When
human olfactory mucosa OECs were transplanted into the contused
spinal cord in rat they reduced lesion size and cavity volume and they
improved locomotor function (Gorrie et al., accepted for publication).
This study indicates that human olfactorymucosa OECs, like cells from
other species, have the potential for spinal cord repair. They also show
that olfactory mucosa OECs are effective in the contused spinal cord, a
“more realistic” model for traumatic human spinal cord injury than
transection injuries. Olfactory bulb OECs are also effective in the
contused model (Plant et al., 2003).
After high level, complete, spinal cord injury, the patient is at risk
of loss of control of blood pressure such that a strong sensory stimulus
below the level of injury, including a full bowel, can cause a rapid and
life threatening rise in blood pressure, known as autonomic dysre-
flexia. In a rat model of autonomic dysreflexia, transplantation of
olfactory mucosa OECs reduced the increase in blood pressure in
response to strong bowel stimulation (Kalincik et al., 2009). This was
accompanied by changes in themorphology of the sympathetic motor
neurons above and below the injury (Kalincik et al., 2009).
Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation in human
spinal cord injury
Clinical trials are essentially well defined experiments on humans.
Phase I trials are generally small studies to ensure that the new drug
or procedure is safe. Phase II trials are to test efficacy in a small group
of well defined, treated and control patients. Phase III trials are large
multi-centre studies to test the efficacy and safety of the treatment in
a large number of patients as a prelude to introducing the drug or
procedure to clinical practice. Phase II and Phase III trials are always
controlled and usually double-blinded to reduce biases introduced by
knowledge of the treatment by patients or their clinicians. There are
now published guides for clinical trials in spinal cord injury published
by an international panel after an international workshop (Fawcett
et al., 2007; Lammertse et al., 2007; Steeves et al., 2007; Tuszynski
et al., 2007).
We undertook a Phase I/IIa clinical trial to test the safety of
autologous transplantation of OECs into the injured spinal cord (Feron
178 A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180Autologous transplantation of olfactory mucosa in human spinal
cord injury
As noted earlier, the olfactory mucosa contains other cell types
which have the potential to assist spinal cord injury repair, in addition
to OECs. Autologous transplantation of olfactory mucosa is being
undertaken in several clinics, although the procedure is not yet
administered according to formal clinical trial protocols.
A pilot study described the outcomes 18 months after autologous
transplantation of olfactory mucosa in 7 patients with complete, ASIA
A, paraplegia from injuries at C4 to T10 spinal levels experienced 6 to
78 months prior to transplantation surgery (Lima et al., 2006). Some
encouraging positive outcomes were reported with increases in ASIA
scores from A to C in two patients. All patients, except one, improved
in sensory and motor component scores of the ASIA score. In three
patients there were “indications of voluntary control of new muscles”
and two patients reported changes in bowel and bladder function or
sensation. Olfaction was temporarily lost but then regained after the
nasal biopsy procedure. MRI showed a reduction of the lesion cavity in
all patients. There were few adverse events with one patient having a
decrease in sensory component of the ASIA score. Two patients had
increased trunk pain for 2–3 months (Lima et al., 2006).
A second study described the outcomes 18 months after the
procedure in four patients with complete, ASIA A paraplegia, and one
patient with incomplete, ASIA B paraplegia from injuries at C6 to T10
spinal levels experienced 29 to 99 months prior to transplantation
surgery (Chhabra et al., 2009). There were no positive outcomes in
any of the assessment criteria and the ASIA B patient had a decrease in
the sensory component of the ASIA score which was not entirely
regained during the study (Chhabra et al., 2009). MRI at 18 months
showed increases in myelomalacia in 4 patients and formation of aet al., 2005). OECs were grown from nasal biopsies from patients with
complete thoracic paraplegia according to published protocols
(Bianco et al., 2004). Patients were males aged 18–55 years with
injuries sustained 18–32 months prior to enrolling in the trial.
Olfactory mucosa OECs derived from biopsies of the patient's nasal
mucosa were grown in vitro for 4–6 weeks according to published
protocols (Bianco et al., 2004) and tested to confirm there was no
bacterial and yeast contamination prior to transplantation. Twelve to
20 million cells were injected into the injured spinal cord after a
laminectomy to expose the extent of the injury (Feron et al., 2005).
This procedure was safe with no adverse outcomes and no changes on
MRI at 1 year (Feron et al., 2005). Patients were assessed for 3 years
with a variety of outcome measures including MRI, AIS assessments,
FIM, SCIM, neurological assessment, SSEP, MEP and psychosocial
assessments (Mackay-Sim et al., 2008), with the aim of identifying
any adverse outcomes.
One of the problems with longitudinal trials and clinical outcome
measures is the risk of bias of the assessors. For this reason, we
designed the trial using a matched group of (non-operated) controls
with the same assessors throughout who were blinded to the patient/
control status. The patients were examined every 3 months with
treated and control groups bandaged on the back over the injury site
to maintain blinded assessments. This design thus allowed some
estimate of efficacy by comparison of treated and control cases,
although the numbers were too few (three per group) for meaningful
statistical analysis. At 3 years there were no alterations in MRI in the
treated group and there were no adverse outcomes such as
neuropathic pain or loss of functions above the level of injury
(Mackay-Sim et al., 2008). In one of the treated patients there was
increased light touch and pin prick sensation below the pre-operative
level which suggests a change of sensation in the zone of partial
preservation (Mackay-Sim et al., 2008).syrinx in one patient. One patient experienced discharge from thesurgical site that required a second operation to close the wound
(Chhabra et al., 2009).
Recently a third report of autologous transplantation of olfactory
mucosa described the outcomes 12–45 months after the procedure on
20 patients with ASIA A or B paraplegia or tetraplegia from injuries at
C4 to T12 experienced 18–189 months previously (Lima et al., 2010).
This study differed in protocol from the others with all patients
undergoing rigorous pre-operative rehabilitation exercise programs
for 4 months prior to surgery. In this pre-operative phase there was no
improvement in outcome measures. After surgery the exercise
program was maintained. In 11/20 patients there was an improve-
ment in ASIA scores: six patients improved from ASIA A to C, two
patients improved from ASIA A to B, and three patients from ASIA B to
C. One patient declined from an ASIA score of B to A. Scores improved
on the FIM and WISCI scales in all patients tested (13) and
urodynamic responses improved in five patients. New voluntary
EMG responses were recorded in 15 patients and new SSEPs were
recorded in 4 patients. MRI indicated that the lesion site in all patients
was filled by the transplants with no evidence of overgrowth and no
syringonyelia. All patients recovered olfactory function. One patient
was hospitalized with aseptic meningitis (Lima et al., 2010).
Collectively these reports represent 32 cases of autologous
olfactory mucosal transplantation in C4-T12 paraplegics and tetra-
plegics. All were followed for 18 months. Collectively they indicate
that the surgical procedure was well tolerated, although 5/32 (15%)
showed evidence of syringomyelia or myelomalacia that could be
attributed to the procedure. ASIA scores improved in 13 patients
(40%) and declined in one patient. Two patients required a second
hospitalization after the initial surgery. Taken together these reports
indicate that the surgical procedure is “relatively safe” (Lima et al.,
2010) with indications that it may improve outcomes, although the
design of the studies is not as a Phase II clinical trial, so firm
conclusions of the efficacy of the procedure are not warranted at this
stage. A blinded and controlled trial would confirm the encouraging
outcomes described.
There are questions raised by the reports of all three studies
related to the methodology. First, the removal of the scar tissue at the
injury site is contentious because of the unknown implications for any
potentially surviving axon tracts. The removed tissue was examined
in two patients and reported to contain a few “peripheral axons”
without stating any criteria for classifying them as “peripheral” and
not “central”. Second, the cellular composition of the grafts was not
defined (see later). Third, the outcome measures were mostly clinical
assessments and subject to assessor variability and bias and there is
no description of methods to reduce this, such as using the same
assessors throughout or standardizing and monitoring different
assessors for consistency. Fourth, the method of olfactory function
testing is not stated despite there being quantitative tests available
(Hummel et al., 2007).
Olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation: what is the future for
clinical trials?
Modern evidence-based medicine demands that the introduction
of new procedures and drugs undergo formal clinical trials under
similar principles accepted in many countries. Without this formal
approach it is unlikely that OEC transplantation will receive
regulatory approval in most jurisdictions and would therefore not
be deliveredwidely to patients in need. Amajor barrier to this route to
regulatory approval is the large cost required, especially in Phase III
trials. In the development of new drugs, these costs are borne by large
corporations, based on exclusive intellectual property rights and Good
Manufacturing Practice batch manufacture of defined products that
can be administered to many patients. These are unlikely to apply to
OEC transplantation therapies because there is limited intellectual
property that is patentable and attractive to commercial investors.
179A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experimental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180Furthermore, with autologous cell transplantation there is no
opportunity to reduce costs through batch processing and wide
distribution of the cellular product. These realities suggest that
commercial backing for clinical trials is unlikely. The costs will have
to be borne by governments and medical foundations. This may be
appropriate since governments and the public currently bear the costs
of spinal cord injury and will have the most to gain from new
therapies, but can they afford it, and will they see this as a priority?
An unexpected barrier to clinical trials may be finding enough
patients to participate in all phases of clinical trials. This may seem
surprising given the large cumulative numbers of individuals with
spinal cord injuries but Phase II trials will require matched groups of
patients and controls large enough for statistical analysis (Fawcett
et al., 2007) and the matching might be very selective further
reducing the pool of patients from which to choose. In early trials the
major focus is on safety and so conservative choices must be made in
selecting participants. For this reason, for example, thoracic injuries
are favoured over cervical, and complete injuries over incomplete
(Fawcett et al., 2007). Complete, thoracic injuries are among the least
common class of spinal cord injuries so greatly reducing the
proportion of participants from which to choose. Complete, thoracic,
injuries are preferred in early safety (Phase I) trials if there is a risk of
damage to functional tracts and induction of syringomyelia which
may affect functions above the level of lesion (and below in the case of
incomplete injuries). Where cells or tissues are transplanted into the
spinal cord injury one risk of the intervention is to interfere with
normal recovery, so early clinical trials will be limited to chronic
injuries. Our trial design used these inclusion criteria and was also
highly selective for psychosocial factors which further reduced the
candidate cohort (Fronek, 2004; Mackay-Sim et al., 2008). With all
these considerations our selection criteria reduced the participants to
six from an original pool of 600 interviewees (Mackay-Sim et al.,
2008). These considerations suggest that future clinical trials of OEC
transplantation will require cooperation between several centres to
be able to find enough patients to fulfil the requirements for formal
clinical trials, with more centres required as the trials move from
Phase I to III. This requirement increases the complexity and cost of
the logistics of such trials imposed by the need for training, data
management and reporting, and quality control across the participat-
ing centres.
There are some technical issues that the field needs to address
before the efficacy of OEC transplantation can be adequately assessed.
One of these is the adequacy of the outcome measures (Steeves et al.,
2007). For the clinician and patient, only clinical and everyday
functional outcomesmay be relevant but these are usually qualitative,
not quantitative, and may not be validated for clinical trials. They may
also lack sensitivity to distinguish incremental improvements that can
direct the design of future trials. These issues are not confined to cell
transplantation trials. The question of cell survival is crucial but
tracking cells after transplantation in living beings requires new
methods of cell labelling. A potential candidate is to label the cells
with paramagnetic nanoparticles (Lee et al., 2004). Currently this
method is not approved for labelling cells transplanted into the
human spinal cord, although this would provide very useful
information in determining the mechanism of any change in outcome
and the survival of cells could be an outcomemeasure in itself. Finally,
improved and validated methods of MR imaging would be beneficial
for future clinical trials. In our trial we used the clinical standard of
time, 1.5 Tesla MRI (Feron et al., 2005). With 3 Tesla MRI now
available it should be possible to get higher resolution images,
although imaging the spinal cord is problematic because of the high
contrast of the bone nearby and the common use of metal stabilisation
protheses. For scientific outcomes (as opposed to clinical outomes)
new imaging methods to quantify aspects of the injury before and
after transplantation would be a major advance. New developments
in diffusion tensor MRI indicate its utility for following intraspinaltracts in living animals with spinal cord injury (Kim et al., 2010) and
protocols are being developed for imaging human spinal cord (Filippi
et al., 2010).
There are different ethics, regulations and allowable practices that
govern medical treatment and clinical trials throughout the world.
This diversity may allow practices to occur in one jurisdiction that
would not be legal in another. This may help advance cell
transplantation trials into clinical practice because different regula-
tions may allow clinical trials to proceed in one country until there is
enough evidence to satisfy the requirements of another. The essential
point is that such clinical trials must be designed to provide reliable
data and allow reliable conclusions. The main issue here is not the
differences in national regulation of cell therapy, but whether the
designs of the treatment and assessment regimes are capable of
finding any treatment effects if they are present. This is the strength of
formalised clinical trials compared to clinician-initiated individual
treatments, even if those treatments are repeated inmany individuals.
References
Au, E., Roskams, A.J., 2003. Olfactory ensheathing cells of the lamina propria in vivo and
in vitro. Glia 41, 224–236.
Au, W.W., Treloar, H.B., Greer, C.A., 2002. Sublaminar organization of the mouse
olfactory bulb nerve layer. J. Comp. Neurol. 446, 68–80.
Barnett, S.C., Hutchins, A.M., Noble, M., 1993. Purification of olfactory nerve
ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb. Dev. Biol. 155, 337–350.
Bianco, J.I., Perry, C., Harkin, D.G., Mackay-Sim, A., Feron, F., 2004. Neurotrophin 3
promotes purification and proliferation of olfactory ensheathing cells from human
nose. Glia 45, 111–123.
Bock, P., Beineke, A., Techangamsuwan, S., Baumgartner, W., Wewetzer, K., 2007.
Differential expression of HNK-1 and p75(NTR) in adult canine Schwann cells and
olfactory ensheathing cells in situ but not in vitro. J. Comp. Neurol. 505, 572–585.
Boyd, J.G., Jahed, A., McDonald, T.G., Krol, K.M., Van Eyk, J.E., Doucette, R., et al., 2006.
Proteomic evaluation reveals that olfactory ensheathing cells but not Schwann cells
express calponin. Glia 53, 434–440.
Carter, L.A.,MacDonald, J.L.,Roskams,A.J., 2004.Olfactoryhorizontal basal cellsdemonstrate
a conserved multipotent progenitor phenotype. J. Neurosci. 24, 5670–5683.
Cheng, L., Esch, F.S., Marchionni, M.A., Mudge, A.W., 1998. Control of Schwann cell
survival and proliferation: autocrine factors and neuregulins. Mol. Cell. Neurosci.
12, 141–156.
Chhabra, H.S., Lima, C., Sachdeva, S., Mittal, A., Nigam, V., Chaturvedi, D., et al., 2009.
Autologous olfactory [corrected] mucosal transplant in chronic spinal cord injury:
an Indian Pilot Study. Spinal Cord 47, 887–895.
Chuah, M.I., Au, C., 1991. Olfactory Schwann cells are derived from precursor cells in the
olfactory epithelium. J. Neurosci. Res. 29, 172–180.
Chuah, M.I., Zheng, D.R., 1992. The human primary olfactory pathway: fine structural
and cytochemical aspects during development and in adults. Microsc. Res. Tech. 23,
76–85.
Curtis, M.A., Kam, M., Nannmark, U., Anderson, M.F., Axell, M.Z., Wikkelso, C., et al.,
2007. Human neuroblasts migrate to the olfactory bulb via a lateral ventricular
extension. Science 315, 1243–1249.
Delorme, B., Nivet, E., Gaillard, J., Haupl, T., Ringe, J., Deveze, A., et al., 2009. The human
nose harbours a niche of olfactory ecto-mesenchymal stem cells displaying
neurogenic and osteogenic properties. Stem Cells Dev. 19, 853–866.
Doucette, R., 1993. Glial progenitor cells of the nerve fiber layer of the olfactory bulb:
effect of astrocyte growth media. J. Neurosci. Res. 35, 274–287.
Fawcett, J.W., Curt, A., Steeves, J.D., Coleman,W.P., Tuszynski, M.H., Lammertse, D., et al.,
2007. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed
by the ICCP panel: spontaneous recovery after spinal cord injury and statistical
power needed for therapeutic clinical trials. Spinal Cord 45, 190–205.
Feron, F., Perry, C., Cochrane, J., Licina, P., Nowitzke, A., Urquhart, S., et al., 2005.
Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation in human spinal cord injury.
Brain 128, 2951–2960.
Feron, F., Perry, C., McGrath, J.J., Mackay-Sim, A., 1998. New techniques for biopsy and
culture of human olfactory epithelial neurons. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg.
124, 861–866.
Filippi, C.G., Andrews, T., Gonyea, J.V., Linnell, G., Cauley, K.A., 2010. Magnetic resonance
diffusion tensor imaging and tractography of the lower spinal cord: application to
diastematomyelia and tethered cord. Eur. Radiol. 20, 2194–2199.
Finger, T.E., Bottger, B., 1993. Peripheral peptidergic fibers of the trigeminal nerve in the
olfactory bulb of the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 334, 117–124.
Fronek, P., 2004. The development of a psychosocial screening model for human
participants with spinal cord injury in experimental research. SCI Psychosocial
Process 17, 6–11.
Gorrie C., Hayward I., Cameron N., Kailainathan G., Nandapalan N., Sutharsan R. et al.,
Effects of human OEC-derived cell transplants in rodent spinal contusion injury.
Brain Research accepted for publication.
Graziadei, G.A., Graziadei, P.P., 1979. Neurogenesis and neuron regeneration in the
olfactory system of mammals. II. Degeneration and reconstitution of the olfactory
sensory neurons after axotomy. J. Neurocytol. 8, 197–213.
ental Neurology 229 (2011) 174–180Graziadei, P.P., Karlan, M.S., Graziadei, G.A., Bernstein, J.J., 1980. Neurogenesis of
sensory neurons in the primate olfactory system after section of the fila olfactoria.
Brain Res. 186, 289–300.
Graziadei, P.P., Monti Graziadei, G.A., 1979. Neurogenesis and neuron regeneration in
the olfactory system of mammals. I. Morphological aspects of differentiation and
structural organization of the olfactory sensory neurons. J. Neurocytol. 8, 1–18.
Guest, J.D., Herrera, L., Margitich, I., Oliveria, M., Marcillo, A., Casas, C.E., 2008.
Xenografts of expanded primate olfactory ensheathing glia support transient
behavioral recovery that is independent of serotonergic or corticospinal axonal
regeneration in nude rats following spinal cord transection. Exp. Neurol. 212,
261–274.
Halpern, M., Martinez-Marcos, A., 2003. Structure and function of the vomeronasal
system: an update. Prog. Neurobiol. 70, 245–318.
Herrera, L.P., Casas, C.E., Bates, M.L., Guest, J.D., 2005. Ultrastructural study of the
primary olfactory pathway in Macaca fascicularis. J. Comp. Neurol. 488, 427–441.
Huang, Z.H., Wang, Y., Cao, L., Su, Z.D., Zhu, Y.L., Chen, Y.Z., et al., 2008. Migratory
properties of cultured olfactory ensheathing cells by single-cell migration assay.
Cell Res. 18, 479–490.
Hummel, T., Kobal, G., Gudziol, H., Mackay-Sim, A., 2007. Normative data for the
“Sniffin' Sticks” including tests of odor identification, odor discrimination, and
olfactory thresholds: an upgrade based on a group of more than 3,000 subjects. Eur.
Arch. Otorhinolaryngol. 264, 237–243.
Ibanez, C., Ito, D., Zawadzka, M., Jeffery, N.D., Franklin, R.J., 2007. Calponin is expressed
by fibroblasts and meningeal cells but not olfactory ensheathing cells in the adult
peripheral olfactory system. Glia 55, 144–151.
Iwatsuki, K., Yoshimine, T., Kishima, H., Aoki, M., Yoshimura, K., Ishihara, M., et al., 2008.
Transplantation of olfactory mucosa following spinal cord injury promotes
recovery in rats. NeuroReport 19, 1249–1252.
Jahed, A., Rowland, J.W., McDonald, T., Boyd, J.G., Doucette, R., Kawaja, M.D., 2007.
Olfactory ensheathing cells express smooth muscle alpha-actin in vitro and in vivo.
J. Comp. Neurol. 503, 209–223.
Jani, H.R., Raisman, G., 2004. Ensheathing cell cultures from the olfactory bulb and
mucosa. Glia 47, 130–137.
Kalincik, T., Choi, E.A., Feron, F., Bianco, J., Sutharsan, R., Hayward, I., et al., 2009.
Olfactory ensheathing cells reduce duration of autonomic dysreflexia in rats with
high spinal cord injury. Auton. Neurosci. 154, 20–29.
Kawaja, M.D., Boyd, J.G., Smithson, L.J., Jahed, A., Doucette, R., 2009. Technical strategies
to isolate olfactory ensheathing cells for intraspinal implantation. J. Neurotrauma
26, 155–177.
Kim, J.H., Loy, D.N., Wang, Q., Budde, M.D., Schmidt, R.E., Trinkaus, K., et al., 2010.
Diffusion tensor imaging at 3 hours after traumatic spinal cord injury predicts long-
term locomotor recovery. J. Neurotrauma 27, 587–598.
Lammertse, D., Tuszynski, M.H., Steeves, J.D., Curt, A., Fawcett, J.W., Rask, C., et al., 2007.
Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed by
the ICCP panel: clinical trial design. Spinal Cord 45, 232–242.
Lankford, K.L., Sasaki, M., Radtke, C., Kocsis, J.D., 2008. Olfactory ensheathing cells
exhibit unique migratory, phagocytic, and myelinating properties in the X-
irradiated spinal cord not shared by Schwann cells. Glia 56, 1664–1678.
Lanza, D.C., Deems, D.A., Doty, R.L., Moran, D., Crawford, D., Rowley 3rd, J.C., et al., 1994.
The effect of human olfactory biopsy on olfaction: a preliminary report.
Laryngoscope 104, 837–840.
Lee, I.H., Bulte, J.W., Schweinhardt, P., Douglas, T., Trifunovski, A., Hofstetter, C., et al.,
2004. In vivo magnetic resonance tracking of olfactory ensheathing glia grafted into
the rat spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 187, 509–516.
Leopold, D.A., Hummel, T., Schwob, J.E., Hong, S.C., Knecht, M., Kobal, G., 2000. Anterior
distribution of human olfactory epithelium. Laryngoscope 110, 417–421.
Leung, C.T., Coulombe, P.A., Reed, R.R., 2007. Contribution of olfactory neural stem cells
to tissue maintenance and regeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 720–726.
Levi, A.D., Guenard, V., Aebischer, P., Bunge, R.P., 1994. The functional characteristics of
Schwann cells cultured from human peripheral nerve after transplantation into a
gap within the rat sciatic nerve. J. Neurosci. 14, 1309–1319.
Li, Y., Field, P., Raisman, G., 1998. Regeneration of adult corticospinal axons induced by
transplanted olfactory ensheathing cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 10514–10524.
Li, Y., Field, P.M., Raisman, G., 1997. Repair of adult rat corticospinal tract by transplants
of olfactory ensheathing cells. Science 277, 2000–2002.
Lim, F., Martin-Bermejo, M.J., Garcia-Escudero, V., Gallego-Hernandez, M.T., Garcia-
Gomez, A., Rabano, A., et al., 2010. Reversibly immortalized human olfactory
ensheathing glia from an elderly donor maintain neuroregenerative capacity. Glia
58, 546–558.
Lima, C., Escada, P., Pratas-Vital, J., Branco, C., Arcangeli, C.A., Lazzeri, G., et al., 2010.
Olfactory mucosal autografts and rehabilitation for chronic traumatic spinal cord
injury. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 24, 10–22.
Lima, C., Pratas-Vital, J., Escada, P., Hasse-Ferreira, A., Capucho, C., Peduzzi, J.D., 2006.
Olfactory mucosa autografts in human spinal cord injury: a pilot clinical study. J.
Spinal Cord Med. 29, 191–203 discussion 4–6.
Lledo, P.M., Merkle, F.T., Alvarez-Buylla, A., 2008. Origin and function of olfactory bulb
interneuron diversity. Trends Neurosci. 31, 392–400.
Lobsiger, C.S., Schweitzer, B., Taylor, V., Suter, U., 2000. Platelet-derived growth factor-
BB supports the survival of cultured rat Schwann cell precursors in synergy with
neurotrophin-3. Glia 30, 290–300.
Lopez-Vales, R., Fores, J., Navarro, X., Verdu, E., 2006. Olfactory ensheathing glia graft in
combination with FK506 administration promote repair after spinal cord injury.
Neurobiol. Dis. 24, 443–454.
Lu, J., Feron, F., Ho, S.M., Mackay-Sim, A., Waite, P.M., 2001. Transplantation of nasal
olfactory tissue promotes partial recovery in paraplegic adult rats. Brain Res. 889,
344–357.Lu, J., Feron, F., Mackay-Sim, A., Waite, P.M., 2002. Olfactory ensheathing cells promote
locomotor recovery after delayed transplantation into transected spinal cord. Brain
125, 14–21.
Mackay-Sim, A., Feron, F., Cochrane, J., Bassingthwaighte, L., Bayliss, C., Davies, W., et al.,
2008. Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation in human paraplegia: a
3-year clinical trial. Brain 131, 2376–2386.
Mackay-Sim, A., Kittel, P., 1991. Cell dynamics in the adult mouse olfactory epithelium:
a quantitative autoradiographic study. J. Neurosci. 11, 979–984.
Martini, R., Bollensen, E., Schachner,M., 1988. Immunocytological localization of themajor
peripheral nervous system glycoprotein P0 and the L2/HNK-1 and L3 carbohydrate
structures in developing and adult mouse sciatic nerve. Dev. Biol. 129, 330–338.
Moran, D.T., Rowley 3rd, J.C., Jafek, B.W., Lovell, M.A., 1982. The fine structure of the
olfactory mucosa in man. J. Neurocytol. 11, 721–746.
Morrison, E.E., Costanzo, R.M., 1990. Morphology of the human olfactory epithelium.
J. Comp. Neurol. 297, 1–13.
Murrell, W., Feron, F., Wetzig, A., Cameron, N., Splatt, K., Bellette, B., et al., 2005.
Multipotent stem cells from adult olfactory mucosa. Dev. Dyn. 233, 496–515.
Nakashima, T., Kimmelmann, C., Snow, J., 1984. Structure of human fetal and adult
olfactory neuroepithelium. Acta Otolaryngol. 110, 641–646.
Paik, S.I., Lehman, M.N., Seiden, A.M., Duncan, H.J., Smith, D.V., 1992. Human olfactory
biopsy. The influence of age and receptor distribution. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head
Neck Surg. 118, 731–738.
Pedersen, P.E., Benson, T.E., 1986. Projection of septal organ receptor neurons to the
main olfactory bulb in rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 252, 555–562.
Pixley, S.K., 1992. The olfactory nerve contains two populations of glia, identified both
in vivo and in vitro. Glia 5, 269–284.
Plant, G.W., Christensen, C.L., Oudega, M., Bunge, M.B., 2003. Delayed transplantation of
olfactory ensheathing glia promotes sparing/regeneration of supraspinal axons in
the contused adult rat spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma 20, 1–16.
Ramer, L.M., Au, E., Richter, M.W., Liu, J., Tetzlaff, W., Roskams, A.J., 2004. Peripheral
olfactory ensheathing cells reduce scar and cavity formation and promote
regeneration after spinal cord injury. J. Comp. Neurol. 473, 1–15.
Ramon-Cueto, A., Cordero, M., Santos-Benito, F., Avila, J., 2000. Functional recovery of
paraplegic rats and motor axon regeneration in their spinal cords by olfactory
ensheathing glia. Neuron 25, 425–435.
Ramon-Cueto, A., Plant, G., Avila, J., Bunge, M., 1998. Long-distance axonal regeneration
in the transected adult rat spinal cord is promoted by ensheathing glia transplants.
J. Neurosci. 18, 3803–3815.
Richter, M.W., Fletcher, P.A., Liu, J., Tetzlaff, W., Roskams, A.J., 2005. Lamina propria and
olfactory bulb ensheathing cells exhibit differential integration and migration and
promote differential axon sprouting in the lesioned spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 25,
10700–10711.
Rizek, P.N., Kawaja, M.D., 2006. Cultures of rat olfactory ensheathing cells are
contaminated with Schwann cells. NeuroReport 17, 459–462.
Roisen, F.J., Klueber, K.M., Lu, C.L., Hatcher, L.M., Dozier, A., Shields, C.B., et al., 2001.
Adult human olfactory stem cells. Brain Res. 890, 11–22.
Rubio, M.P., Munoz-Quiles, C., Ramon-Cueto, A., 2008. Adult olfactory bulbs from
primates provide reliable ensheathing glia for cell therapy. Glia 56, 539–551.
Schaefer, M.L., Bottger, B., Silver, W.L., Finger, T.E., 2002. Trigeminal collaterals in the
nasal epithelium and olfactory bulb: a potential route for direct modulation of
olfactory information by trigeminal stimuli. J. Comp. Neurol. 444, 221–226.
Shipley, M.T., Ennis, M., 1996. Functional organization of olfactory system. J. Neurobiol.
30, 123–176.
Silver, W.L., Finger, T.E., 2009. The anatomical and electrophysiological basis of
peripheral nasal trigeminal chemoreception. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1170, 202–205.
Smale, K.A., Doucette, R., Kawaja, M.D., 1996. Implantation of olfactory ensheathing
cells in the adult rat brain following fimbria-fornix transection. Exp. Neurol. 137,
225–233.
Smithson, L.J., Kawaja, M.D., 2009. A comparative examination of biomarkers for
olfactory ensheathing cells in cats and guinea pigs. Brain Res. 1284, 41–53.
Steeves, J.D., Lammertse,D., Curt, A., Fawcett, J.W., Tuszynski,M.H.,Ditunno, J.F., et al., 2007.
Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury (SCI) as developed
by the ICCP panel: clinical trial outcome measures. Spinal Cord 45, 206–221.
Storan, M.J., Key, B., 2006. Septal organ of Gruneberg is part of the olfactory system.
J. Comp. Neurol. 494, 834–844.
Teng, X., Nagata, I., Li, H.P., Kimura-Kuroda, J., Sango, K., Kawamura, K., et al., 2008.
Regeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic axons after transplantation of olfactory
ensheathing cells and fibroblasts prevents fibrotic scar formation at the lesion site.
J. Neurosci. Res. 86, 3140–3150.
Tome, M., Lindsay, S.L., Riddell, J.S., Barnett, S.C., 2009. Identification of nonepithelial
multipotent cells in the embryonic olfactory mucosa. Stem Cells 27, 2196–2208.
Tuszynski, M.H., Steeves, J.D., Fawcett, J.W., Lammertse, D., Kalichman, M., Rask, C., et al.,
2007. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed by
the ICCP Panel: clinical trial inclusion/exclusion criteria and ethics. Spinal Cord 45,
222–231.
Vincent, A.J., Taylor, J.M., Choi-Lundberg, D.L., West, A.K., Chuah, M.I., 2005. Genetic
expression profile of olfactory ensheathing cells is distinct from that of Schwann
cells and astrocytes. Glia 51, 132–147.
Vincent, A.J., West, A.K., Chuah, M.I., 2003. Morphological plasticity of olfactory
ensheathing cells is regulated by cAMP and endothelin-1. Glia 41, 393–403.
Windus, L.C., Lineburg, K.E., Scott, S.E., Claxton, C., Mackay-Sim, A., Key, B., et al., 2010.
Lamellipodia mediate the heterogeneity of central olfactory ensheathing cell
interactions. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 67, 1735–1750.
Xiao, M., Klueber, K.M., Lu, C., Guo, Z., Marshall, C.T., Wang, H., et al., 2005. Human adult
olfactory neural progenitors rescue axotomized rodent rubrospinal neurons and
promote functional recovery. Exp. Neurol. 194, 12–30.180 A. Mackay-Sim, J.A. St John / Experim
