MOLECULAR AND DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Metamorphosis and the regenerative capacity of spinal
cord axons in Xenopus laevis
Kurt M. Gibbs,1 Sridar V. Chittur2 and Ben G. Szaro1
1Department of Biological Sciences and the Center for Neuroscience Research, University at Albany, State University of New York,
1400 Washington Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA
2Center for Functional Genomics and Department of Biomedical Sciences, University at Albany, State University of New York,
Rensselaer, NY, USA
Keywords: axon regeneration, microarray, spinal cord injury, thyroid hormone
Abstract
Throughout the vertebrate subphylum, the regenerative potential of central nervous system axons is greatest in embryonic stages
and declines as development progresses. For example, Xenopus laevis can functionally recover from complete transection of the
spinal cord as a tadpole but is unable to do so after metamorphosing into a frog. Neurons of the reticular formation and raphe nucleus
are among those that regenerate axons most reliably in tadpole and that lose this ability after metamorphosis. To identify molecular
factors associated with the success and failure of spinal cord axon regeneration, we pharmacologically manipulated thyroid hormone
(TH) levels using methimazole or triiodothyronine, to either keep tadpoles in a permanently larval state or induce precocious
metamorphosis, respectively. Following complete spinal cord transection, serotonergic axons crossed the lesion site and tadpole
swimming ability was restored when metamorphosis was inhibited, but these events failed to occur when metamorphosis was
prematurely induced. Thus, the metamorphic events controlled by TH led directly to the loss of regenerative potential. Microarray
analysis identified changes in hindbrain gene expression that accompanied regeneration-permissive and -inhibitory conditions,
including many genes in the permissive condition that have been previously associated with axon outgrowth and neuroprotection.
These data demonstrate that changes in gene expression occur within regenerating neurons in response to axotomy under
regeneration-permissive conditions in which normal development has been suspended, and they identify candidate genes for future
studies of how central nervous system axons can successfully regenerate in some vertebrates.
Introduction
The capacity for functional recovery from spinal cord injury varies
phylogenetically across the vertebrate subphylum. Amniotes generally
lose this capacity during fetal development, whereas anamniotes such
as lamprey and salamander fully recover throughout life. In anurans,
however, the loss of spinal cord regenerative capacity occurs at
metamorphosis (Sims, 1962; Forehand & Farel, 1982; Beattie et al.,
1990; Ten Donkelaar, 2000). This precise temporal correlation makes
tadpoles an attractive model system for studying the underlying
cellular and molecular bases for the developmental loss of regener-
ative capacity.
The observation that tadpoles that spontaneously fail to metamor-
phose also fail to recover from spinal cord injury has led to
speculations that metamorphosis itself may be required for recovery
(Beattie et al., 1990). During anuran metamorphosis, which is
controlled by steadily rising levels of thyroid hormone (TH), the
transition from swimming to limb-based locomotion is mediated by
extensive cellular proliferation and rewiring of the nervous system
(Marsh-Armstrong et al., 2004). Such rewiring could effect recovery
simply by bypassing damaged connections. Yet, double labeling of cut
axons with fluorescent dextran amines has shown that regeneration of
severed spinal cord axons, particularly those of reticular and raphe
neurons, occurs in Xenopus tadpoles (Gibbs & Szaro, 2006). Because
these projections are essential for voluntary movement, recovery of
function does involve regeneration of cut axons. Premetamorphic
tadpoles subjected to spinal cord injury typically recover during
metamorphosis, making the parsing of the cellular and molecular
events of regeneration and recovery from those of metamorphosis
problematic. The possibility remains that metamorphosis is necessary
to create conditions that promote regeneration.
To begin to separate cellular and molecular mechanisms relevant to
regeneration from those of metamorphosis, levels of TH were
pharmacologically manipulated in Xenopus laevis tadpoles subjected
to complete spinal cord transection prior to the onset of endogenous
TH production. In Xenopus, the transition from larval to juvenile
forms is controlled directly by steadily rising levels of TH, from the
onset of prometamorphosis at stage 54 through metamorphic climax at
stage 61 (Gudernatsch, 1912; Dodd & Dodd, 1976; Leloup and
Buscaglia, 1977; Tata, 2006). These rising levels of TH initiate
transcription of immediate response genes at varying thresholds in
Correspondence: Ben G. Szaro, as above.
E-mail: bgs86@albany.edu
Received 25 May 2010, accepted 17 September 2010
European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 33, pp. 9–25, 2011 doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07477.x
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience
each responding tissue. The expression of these TH-responsive genes
in turn induces that of multiple downstream genes specific to each cell
type (Shi, 2000). The entire cascade can be inhibited effectively by
methimazole treatment (Buckbinder & Brown, 1993), which blocks
endogenous TH synthesis; such treatment of pre-metamorphic
tadpoles arrests development at stage 54. Alternatively, treating them
with 3,3¢,5-triiodo-L-thyronine (T3) prematurely accelerates their
development toward metamorphic climax (Buckbinder & Brown,
1993; Brown et al., 1995; Shi, 2000, 2009; Brown & Cai, 2007).
Using these established pharmacological paradigms, we asked
whether growth of axons across a spinal cord lesion and functional
recovery occur if metamorphosis is inhibited or prematurely induced.
This paradigm was also used to suppress the high background of
changes in gene expression taking place during metamorphosis to
identify specific changes in gene expression in hindbrain that
accompany successful axon regeneration.
Materials and methods
Animals
Pre-metamorphic tadpoles (Nieuwkoop and Faber stages 51–53;
Nieuwkoop & Faber, 1994) and juvenile frogs (2 weeks post-
metamorphic) were periodic albino Xenopus laevis (Hoperskaya,
1975; Tompkins, 1977) obtained from our breeding colony at the State
University of New York at Albany. Tadpoles and juveniles were
maintained at 24 C on a diet of suspended nettle powder (Wunder-
lich-Diez, Milburn, NJ) and at 21 C on a diet of salmon chow
(Rangen, Buhl, ID, USA), respectively. Procedures in this study were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) of the State University of New York at Albany.
Spinal cord transection and pharmacological manipulation
of TH levels
Tadpoles and juvenile frogs were anesthetized by immersion in 0.04
and 0.1%, respectively, ethyl 3-aminobenzoate methanesulfonate (MS-
222; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Fully anesthetized animals
were placed into a beeswax-lined petri dish, where they were
restrained with rubber bands anchored by straight pins. A dorsolateral
incision at the mid-thoracic level was made using Vannas-style
microdissecting spring scissors (15000-00; Fine Science Tools, Foster
City, CA, USA) to cut through the skin, some axial musculature, and
cartilaginous vertebrae. The spinal cord was then completely
transected with the microdissecting scissors. The totality of the lesion
was confirmed at the time of surgery by passing the tips of fine forceps
(modified Dumont #5 Biologie tips; Fine Science Tools) through the
injury site while observing the spinal cord; this was possible because
periodic albino tadpoles lack pigment and are largely transparent. For
further confirmation that the transections were complete, we examined
the behavior of the animals 1 day after surgery for signs of residual
movement; any animals showing such signs were removed from the
study. Animals were post-operatively maintained in individual 1.5-L
tanks filled with aerated sterile-filtered tap water containing 4 mg ⁄ L
gentamicin sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich).
For the methimazole-treated groups, tadpoles were placed in water
containing 1 mm methimazole (M8506; Sigma-Aldrich) 3 days prior
to the operation to ensure that TH production was inhibited by the time
of the surgery. After surgery, both the methimazole- and T3-treated
groups were maintained continuously in rearing water containing,
respectively, 1 mm methimazole or 5 nm T3 (T6397; Sigma-Aldrich);
rearing water was changed daily.
Immunohistochemistry
Animals were killed with an overdose of MS-222, and the central
nervous system (CNS) encased in its vertebral column was dissected
free and immersion-fixed overnight in phosphate-buffered (0.1 m
sodium phosphate, pH 7.4) 10% formalin (PB-formalin). To remove
the fixative and protect them from freeze damage, tissues were
immersed successively overnight in PB and then in 30% sucrose in
PB. Prior to further processing, the CNS was photographed as a whole
mount through a stereomicroscope (Leica MZ16 FA). The brain and
spinal cord were then embedded in Tissue Freezing Medium (Triangle
Biomedical, Durham, NC, USA) and cryosectioned at 20 lm either
parasagittally or transversely. Sections were thaw-mounted onto
gelatin-coated glass slides, post-fixed in PB-formalin, and processed
for double-label immunofluorescence.
For immunohistochemistry, washes were done in Tris–buffered
saline (TBS; 50 mm Tris, 150 mm NaCl, pH 7.5), and blocking of
nonspecific binding of antibodies was done in 10% fetal calf serum
(2 h), followed by 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 3% normal
serum in TBS (1 h) at room temperature. Immunostaining with each
primary and secondary antibody was done overnight at 4 C, and
slides were mounted under cover glass with Fluoromount-G
(SouthernBiotech, Birmingham, AL, USA). The secondary antibod-
ies used to detect the middle neurofilament protein (NF-M),
serotonin and brain lipid binding protein (BLBP) primary antibodies
were Alexafluor 488 goat antimouse, Alexafluor 546 goat antirat and
Alexafluor 546 goat antirabbit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR,
USA), respectively, at a concentration of 2 lg ⁄mL and an incubation
period of 2–4 h. Immunostained slides were imaged using a Zeiss
LSM 510 Meta laser scanning confocal microscope. The objectives
and scanning parameters used for each image are provided in the
figure legends.
For assays of the extent of reinnervation of the lesion site, confocal
images of NF-M-immunostained parasagittal sections were imported
as tiff files into Metamorph (version 7.6). For each section, the density
of immunofluorescence (total integrated immunofluorescence intensity
divided by the pixel area) was determined for the region of interest, as
defined by the ventral tissue bridge spanning the lesion site. These
values were then normalized to the density of NF-M immunofluores-
cence within the ventral tract of unoperated controls and averaged
among animals for each treatment and timepoint. Statistical pairwise
comparisons were then performed using t-tests, with the degrees of
freedom determined by the number of animals used in the compar-
isons (Sachs, 1984).
Antibody characterization
The mouse monoclonal antibody RMO270 (2 lg ⁄mL) was used to
label axons. This antibody, which is an IgG2a, targets the Xenopus
NF-M independently of its state of phosphorylation (Szaro et al.,
1989; Wetzel et al., 1989). It was originally made against rat
neurofilaments and recognizes an epitope at the C-terminus of
NF-M that is conserved from torpedo fish to human and is found in
Xenopus (Shaw, 1992; Gervasi & Szaro, 1997). It has been used
extensively in immunohistochemical studies in Xenopus to label
developing and regenerating axons from early neurulae stages through
metamorphosis (Lin & Szaro, 1994; Zhao & Szaro, 1994; Undamatla
& Szaro, 2001).
Serotonergic axons were labeled with a rat monoclonal antibody
(clone YC5 ⁄ 45, diluted 1 : 100; GTX26336, GeneTex, Irvine, CA,
USA) that targets serotonin (Consolazione et al., 1981; Milstein et al.,
1983). This antibody was raised against a serotonin–bovine serum
10 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
albumin immunogen and has been shown in aldehyde-fixed tissue
sections to react with serotonergic but not dopaminergic neurons, and
to lose immunoreactivity when serotonin synthesis is suppressed
(Consolazione et al., 1981; Milstein et al., 1983).
BLBP was detected with a rabbit antiserum (1 : 1000) raised against
the full length (132 amino acid)mouse recombinant protein expressed in
E. coli (Feng et al., 1994). In mouse developing cerebellum, the
antibody stains Bergmann glia during the period of neuronal differen-
tiation and migration and recognizes a single 15-kDa band on Western
blots. Expression of BLBP in subsets of radial glia is conserved in other
vertebrates including zebrafish (Raymond et al., 2006) and turtle
(Rehermann et al., 2009). Xenopus laevis expresses a highly similar
protein (Fabp7; accession number NM_001095326) of the same length
and which is 82% identical (91% similar) to the mouse protein and, in
Xenopus spinal cord, the antibody stains cells morphologically resem-
bling GFAP- and vimentin-positive radial glia (Szaro & Gainer, 1988).
In situ hybridization
Tadpoles (five per group) that underwent no drug treatments received
spinal cord transections as described above and were allowed to
recover for 1, 3 days or 1 week. An equal number of age-matched
unoperated animals were selected for each timepoint to be used as
controls. The dissected CNS was prepared for cryosectioning as
described for immunocytochemistry except that sections were thaw-
mounted onto silane-coated slides (Polysciences Inc.). GAP-43 cDNA
was obtained by PCR from cDNA prepared from Xenopus laevis
spinal cord (forward primer ATAAT GGATC CTGAT GATCA
GCACA GACAG AGCTC A; reverse primer ATTAA GGATC
CCAAA CTGTC GGGAG GGCTA TTTGT T) and subsequently
subcloned into a pGEM3Z (Promega) RNA-expression plasmid. The
preparation of Xenopus NF-M and peripherin cDNAs, as well as
methods for in vitro transcription of digoxigenin-labeled cRNA
probes, hybridization, and visualization using alkaline phosphatase-
conjugated antibodies to digoxigenin, were as described elsewhere
(Gervasi et al., 2003).
Behavioral testing
Tadpoles from each of three groups (methimazole, n = 14; T3, n = 18;
and untreated, n = 3) were scored independently by two investigators
the day after surgery and then on a weekly basis for the following
behaviors: startle reflex, volitional swimming, fictive swimming and
righting reflex (Beattie et al., 1990). The startle reflex, which is an
involuntary response to noise resulting in the animal swimming away
from the source, was elicited by sharply striking the side of the recovery
tank once with a pencil. Volitional swimming is the tadpole’s voluntary
use of tail undulation in a straight or circular stroke pattern to move in a
particular direction. Fictive swimming is movement of the distal tail
while hovering or floating to stay in place. The righting reflex is the
ability of the tadpole tomaintain its correct posture (dorsal side up)when
swimming or floating. Behaviors were scored as 1 (absent), 2 (weakly
present), or 3 (moderately present to normal) for each animal and then
tabulated as the mean (± SEM) score for animals in that group.
Gene expression profiling of hindbrain by microarray
Premetamorphic (NF stage 51–53) tadpoles receiving spinal cord
transections were subsequently treated with either 1 mm methimazole
for 3 days, 1 or 3 weeks, or with T3 for 3 days or 1 week. Unoperated
animals treated with methimazole for 1 week served as a reference
control for statistical comparisons against each experimental group.
Animals were killed with an overdose of MS-222, and the CNS encased
in its vertebral column was quickly removed and placed into RNAlater
(Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. The CNSwas
later dissected free, and the hindbrain was harvested between the rostral
and caudal margins of the fourth ventricle. The tissue was then
homogenized (Polytron, Kinematica, Inc., Bohemia, NY), and total
RNA was extracted (RNeasy Plus Mini kit; Qiagen, Valencia, CA,
USA). For each individual hindbrain sample (90 total), the integrity of
the RNAwas assessed using Bioanalyzer Pico Chips (Agilent Technol-
ogies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). For each of the six treatment groups (15
animals each), three biological replicates were created for each group by
pooling equal amounts of total RNA from five animals. Total RNAwas
then amplified and labeled using the One Cycle Amplification kit
(Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The RNA was then fragmented
and hybridized onto Affymetrix Xenopus laevis 2.0 microarrays at the
Center for Functional Genomics (University at Albany, State University
of New York, Rensselaer, NY, USA). Affymetrix Poly-A RNA and
hybridization controls were added to samples to ensure the quality of
amplification and hybridization, respectively.
Subsequent data analysis was performed using genespring GX 10
Software (Agilent). In applying the MAS 5.0 algorithm, the methi-
mazole-treated unoperated condition was used as the baseline for pair-
wise comparisons against each of the other five conditions. Data were
further filtered by: (i) rejecting probe sets marked absent in all
conditions; (ii) removing genes whose expression fell into the bottom
20th percentile of all conditions; (iii) selecting genes that showed
differential expression at or above 1.8-fold; and (iv) using P < 0.05 as
the criterion for significance in a nondirectional t-test (treatment vs.
methimazole-treated, unoperated control).
Whenever possible, the UniGene ID (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
unigene), which is used by Affymetrix to designate each transcript on
the array, was used to assign the gene name. When no name was given
in the UniGene entry, a prospective name was assigned using the most
probable identification derived from BLASTing the UniGene ID
sequence using the BLink tool in UniGene. The latter are identified in
the Tables by the abbreviations HP (hypothetical protein) or MGC
(mammalian gene collection) within the gene name. The functional
category of individual genes was obtained through GeneCards (http://
www.genecards.org).
Array validation
Fifteen genes were selected for validation spanning the range of
significant fold-changes from low (1.8-fold) to high (13.6-fold). These
were quantified by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase poly-
merase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) from the same pools of total RNA
that were used on the arrays. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed with
oligo dT primers and Super Script III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen)
to generate cDNA. Power Sybr Green master mix (Applied Biosys-
tems) was then used following the protocol of the manufacturer with
primers that amplified a 150–200 base-pair amplicon. Fold changes
were determined using the DDCT method (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001),
normalizing to 18S rRNA, the expression of which was highly
constant in both the microarray and qRT-PCR results. Results were
averaged among the three groups of pooled animals for each condition.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. For comparison of the density of
NF-M immunostaining within the tissue bridge across the lesion site, a
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 11
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
directional Student’s t-test was performed between no drug treatment
and methimazole treatment vs. T3 treatment, with degrees of freedom
determined by the number of animals (Fig. 3). For behavioral data
(Fig. 6), pairwise nondirectional comparisons were made among the
no drug, methimazole- and T3-treated groups for each timepoint using
the Wilcoxon, Mann and Whitney U-test, a nonparametric test for
ranked data. For microarray data (Tables 2–4; Fig. 7), a nondirectional
Student’s t-test was performed between treatment and the methimaz-
ole-treated unoperated control, with degrees of freedom determined by
the number of arrays. Calculations for immunohistochemical and
behavioral data were performed using a hand-held calculator in
conjunction with published formulae and tables (Sachs, 1984).
Calculations for array data were done using genespring GX 10
software** (Agilent). Results were considered statistically significant
at P £ 0.05.
Results
Effects of methimazole and T3 on normal development
To manipulate TH levels and their effects on development, we
followed well-established pharmacological paradigms for the use of
methimazole and T3 in Xenopus laevis (Buckbinder & Brown, 1993).
In X. laevis, endogenous TH production begins at NF stage 54,
gradually peaking at metamorphic climax (NF stage 61) and declining
thereafter (Leloup and Buscaglia, 1977; Simon et al., 2002). Prior to
the production of endogenous TH, animals develop without the need
for the hormone, successfully reaching stages that include the eruption
and pattern formation of both fore- and hindlimbs (Shi, 2000). Rising
levels of TH drive subsequent development, including maturation
and innervation of the limbs, as well as considerable neuro- and
gliogenesis in the CNS (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 2004).
Confirmatory of these earlier observations, methimazole treatment
of stage 51–53 tadpoles effectively arrested development at stage 54
(Fig. 1C). Such tadpoles were essentially indistinguishable from
untreated stage 53–54 tadpoles (Fig. 1A). Conversely, T3 treatment at
these stages accelerated tadpole development markedly (compare B
and D in Fig. 1). Within 1 week of the onset of T3 treatment, growth
and differentiation of the hindlimbs were greatly accelerated. In
addition, the eyes, brain and head underwent a near complete
transformation from the morphology typically associated with
tadpoles to that associated with froglets. Continuous exposure of
tadpoles to 5 nm T3 unfortunately led to asynchronous development
and poor survival beyond 1 week, necessitating their killing at this
time.
Effects of TH on wound healing
Differences among the various treatments in the reconstitution and
wound healing of transected spinal cord were visible under external
examination (Fig. 2). One week after transection, reconstitution of the
cut spinal cord was similarly incomplete in untreated tadpoles and
those treated with methimazole. Ventrally the cut ends appeared
rejoined but dorsally they remained separate to varying degrees. At
3 weeks, healing of untreated animals had progressed much further
than it did with methimazole treatment. In the untreated animals, the
cut ends had completely rejoined and, except for the dorsal fissure
deviating from the midline, the wound was nearly invisible. With
methimazole treatment the wound site remained visible, forming a line
of constriction that circumscribed the spinal cord. With T3 treatment
A B
C D
Fig. 1. Effects of altering TH levels on normal development. (A) Untreated late stage 53 tadpole. (B) The same tadpole as in A, 1 week later, without drug
treatment. (C) Tadpole treated with 1 mm methimazole from late stage 53 onward for 1 week, to block endogenous TH synthesis prior to its normal onset.
(D) Tadpole treated with 5 nm T3 from late stage 53 onward for 1 week to bring TH levels prematurely to levels similar to those experienced at metamorphic climax.
With methimazole treatment, development progresses only as far as NF stage 54, whereas with T3 treatment, anatomical features typically seen only at late
metamorphic climax (after stage 60) appear prematurely. Note especially the relative appearance of the hindlimb (hl), brain (b), eye (e) and head (h) between the two
treatments.
12 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
and in untreated juveniles, at 1 week, wound healing appeared
distinctly different from that of either untreated or methimazole-treated
tadpoles at the same timepoint. Although the cut ends had largely
rejoined in T3-treated tadpoles, the juncture appeared as a translucent
cuff of tissue surrounding the spinal cord which, based on the
histological evidence presented next, appeared to be the result of
regrowth of meninges rather than of axons. In untreated juveniles, the
transection site formed a sharply constricted boundary, resembling the
early stages of scar formation reported by others (Beattie et al., 1990).
Effects of TH on axon regeneration
For both untreated and methimazole-treated tadpoles, histological
examination of parasagittal sections confirmed that, within 1 week, the
cut ends of the transected spinal cord had rejoined along the ventral
aspect but remained separated dorsally (Fig. 3A and B). As revealed
by immunostaining for NF-M, axons were evident throughout the
reformed ventral tract of untreated tadpoles at 1 week (Fig. 3A).
Axons were also visible crossing the lesion site of methimazole-
treated tadpoles (Fig. 3B), but they were less dense than in untreated
tadpoles. At 3 weeks, NF-M-immunostained axons were more
abundant within the lesion site of both groups (Fig. 3D and E),
although staining still appeared more pronounced in untreated than in
methimazole-treated animals. In sharp contrast, axons of T3-treated
tadpoles and juvenile froglets at 1 week approached but did not
appreciably invade the lesion site (Fig. 3C and F).
One way to quantify reinnervation is to analyze the intensity of
neurofilament immunostaining across a lesion, as has been done
to estimate the degree of reinnervation following spinal cord injury in
N-CAM-deficient transgenic mice (Zhang et al., 2010). Thus, a
comparison was made among these groups of the average intensity per
unit area of NF-M immunofluorescence within the tissue bridge
crossing the lesion site (integrated immunofluorescence intensity
divided by area of the region of interest), normalized to that of the
ventral tract of unoperated controls. These data confirmed what was
seen by eye (Fig. 3G). At 1 week, the densities of NF-M immuno-
fluorescence of the no drug treatment and methimazole-treated groups
were 34 ± 9% and 22 ± 2% of that of unoperated control animals,
respectively. These values were signficantly greater than that of
T3-treated tadpole [P = 0.04 (t2,2); P = 0.001 (t3,2), respectively], at
6 ± 1%. At 3 weeks, the density of reinnervation as assayed in this
way rose to 57% and 31 ± 6% of unoperated controls for the no drug
and methimazole-treated animals, respectively. Collectively, these data
indicated that axons regrew through the lesion in both methimazole-
treated and in untreated tadpoles, but failed to do so in either
T3-treated tadpoles or untreated juveniles. An antibody to serotonin
was used in double-labeling experiments with the NF-M antibody to
label specifically the descending axons of raphe and reticular neurons
(Fig. 4). In Xenopus, these axons constitute the principal serotonergic
axons of descending pathways (van Mier et al., 1986) and have been
demonstrated by double-labeling with fluorescent dextran amines to
regenerate following spinal cord transection in tadpoles (Beattie et al.,
1990; Gibbs & Szaro, 2006). Because these hindbrain neurons are
born before stage 51–53, the presence of serotonergic axons in the
ventral tract has been taken as reliable evidence of successful
regeneration of their axons (Beattie et al., 1990; Ten Donkelaar,
2000). Although both serotonin and NF-M staining were visible in
untreated and methimazole-treated tadpoles at 1 and 3 weeks, their
colocalization was relatively rare (not shown). This may be because
NF-M immunostaining may lag behind the tips of individual
regenerating fibers, as reported in Xenopus regenerating optic nerve
(Zhao & Szaro, 1994). Similarly, the vesicular nature of serotonin
immunostaining makes it more difficult to assign labeling to
individual axons unless NF-M staining is present. The colocalization
of serotonin and NF-M became convincing at later timepoints. At
5 weeks after transection, for example, numerous axons that were
A B C D
E F G H
Fig. 2. Effects of altering TH levels on wound healing after spinal cord transection. (A–C and E–H) Xenopus laevis tadpoles (NF stage 51–53) or (D) juvenile frogs
received a complete spinal cord transection and were allowed to recover for 1 (B, D, F and H) or 3 (C and G) weeks before killing. After fixation, spinal cords were
dissected free and imaged through a dissecting microscope (Leica MZ16FA). At 1 week, wound healing (arrowheads) was similar in (B) untreated and (F)
methimazole-treated tadpoles; rostral (top) and caudal (bottom) spinal cord segments were not yet completely healed together. (C and G) At 3 weeks, the separated
segments had completely rejoined; the wound (arrowheads) was nearly indiscernible in untreated tadpoles (C), but was more evident in those treated with
methimazole (G). (H) With 5 nm T3 treatment at 1 week, wound healing was more advanced than in either methimazole-treated or untreated tadpoles at the same
time point. The rostral (above the arrowheads) and caudal (below the arrowheads) segments of transected T3-treated spinal cord were joined by a translucent cuff of
tissue. (D) In untreated juvenile frogs, 1 week after transection, the rostral (top) and caudal (bottom) segments were also joined together, but the ends of the segments
were separated by a sharper boundary than in the other cases (arrowheads). Scale bar, 1 mm (applies to all panels).
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 13
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
double-labeled for NF-M and serotonin were readily apparent in the
descending tract of methimazole-treated animals subjected to spinal
cord transection (Fig. 4), further confirming that the axons crossing
the lesion had originated from the raphe and reticular nuclei and had
thus regenerated in the absence of metamorphosis.
BLBP expression and axonal pathfinding in transected spinal
cord
Radial glia bridge the gap in transected spinal cord in a variety of
species, including Xenopus and newt, and regrowing axons appear to
use them to facilitate crossing the lesion site (Michel & Reier, 1979;
Singer et al., 1979). An antibody against BLBP, which specifically
labels radial glia (Feng et al., 1994), has been used in turtle to label
the glial tracks that axons use as they regrow (Rehermann et al.,
2009). Thus, we used this antibody to examine the degree to which TH
affects the presence of BLBP-positive radial glial fibers and their
ability to facilitate axon regeneration in Xenopus.
At 1 week post-surgery, BLBP-positive processes extensively
bridged the lesion site of animals of all treatment groups (Fig. 5).
However, consistent with differences in wound healing, BLBP
processes filled in the lesion site more effectively in untreated and
T3-treated tadpoles than in those treated with methimazole (compare
Fig. 5A¢, C¢ and B¢, respectively). Despite the presence of BLBP-
positive radial glial fibers in all groups, NF-M-positive axons that
invaded the lesion site appeared to co-localize generally with BLBP-
positive fibers in only the untreated (Fig. 5A) and methimazole-treated
(Fig. 5C) groups, consistent with the observation from other systems
A B C
G
ED F
Fig. 3. The influence of TH on the ability of cut spinal cord axons to grow across the lesion. (A–C and F) One and (D and E) 3 weeks following complete spinal
cord transection, parasagittal spinal cord sections were immunostained for NF-M. NF-M-positive axons (arrowheads) were seen crossing the injury site (horizontal
bracket) in the ventral spinal cord of tadpoles receiving either no drug treatment (A and D) or 1 mm methimazole (B and E) but not in those treated with T3 (C) or in
juvenile frog (F). Dorsal is up and rostral is to the left in all panels. Images represent a single optical section [20 ·, 0.75 NA; 0.9, 0.9, 2.1 lm (x, y, z)]. (G)
Quantitative comparison of the density of NF-M immunostaining within the ventral tissue bridge crossing the lesion (integrated intensity of NF-M immunostaining
within the tissue bridge divided by area of the tissue bridge), expressed as a percentage of that within the ventral tract of unoperated control tadpoles. *P = 0.04,
(t2,2); **P = 0.001 (t3,2). Scale bar in A applies to A–E.
14 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
that successfully regenerating axons use these radial glia to bridge the
lesion site. With T3 treatment (Fig. 5C), BLBP-positive fibers within
the lesion were not associated with NF-M-positive axons.
Behavioral recovery
To address whether animals recover function when metamorphosis is
arrested, we tracked the recovery of functional behaviors in methi-
mazole-treated animals (n = 14) on a weekly basis for 3 weeks.
Earlier studies charting functional recovery of untreated animals found
that behaviors return in a stereotypical pattern after complete spinal
cord transection (Beattie et al., 1990). The startle reflex returns first,
followed by the restoration of volitional swimming, fictive swimming
and the righting reflex, in that order. Our findings with untreated
tadpoles confirmed these earlier studies – the startle reflex, as well as
volitional and fictive swimming, began to return in untreated tadpoles
by 1 week and were essentially normal by 2 weeks (Fig. 6). The
righting reflex took the longest to recover; even at 3 weeks, tadpoles
in the untreated group generally floated dorsal side down, only
righting themselves while swimming.
Methimazole-treated animals also recovered function. Recovery of
the startle reflex, a strong indicator of functional regeneration of
ascending and descending pathways in anamniotic spinal cord
(Zottoli & Freemer, 2006; Takeda et al., 2007), was virtually as
rapid in methimazole-treated tadpoles as in those without drug
treatment; both groups were essentially normal with respect to this
behavior at 2 weeks. The recovery of other behaviors occurred more
slowly in methimazole-treated than in untreated tadpoles, consistent
with the reduced staining of axons crossing the lesion site of
methimazole-treated animals. Scores for volitional swimming in the
methimazole-treated group were significantly lower than in the
untreated group at 1 week (Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney U-test;
0.02 < P < 0.05), and those for fictive swimming at 2 weeks
(Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney U-test; 0.01 < P < 0.02). Both these
behaviors eventually recovered to normal at 5–6 weeks (not tabu-
lated) but the righting reflex never recovered, suggesting that the
return of this reflex requires normal development.
Over the 1-week period for which T3-treated animals (n = 18)
could be followed, virtually every animal remained in their post-
operative paralyzed state. Taken together with the morphological data,
the behavioral data further supported the conclusion that, when
prometamorphosis was arrested, axons were able to regenerate and
restore function. No such recovery was seen in animals when
precocious metamorphosis was invoked by T3 treatment.
Gene expression profiling of the hindbrain after spinal cord
transection
Methimazole treatment allowed for the profiling of changes in gene
expression during successful recovery from spinal cord injury while
suppressing the considerable background of changes that accompany
metamorphosis. For these studies, we decided to concentrate on
changes in hindbrain, the source of regenerating spinal cord axons,
rather than at the injury site, to characterize changes occurring in the
cells of origin of regenerating axons. The RNAs analyzed on
microarrays came from the hindbrains of six separate groups of
animals: (i) unoperated, methimazole-treated stage 51–53 tadpoles
(reference control); (ii–iv) methimazole-treated, spinal cord-transected
animals at 3 days, 1 and 3 weeks (regeneration-permissive condi-
tions); and (v and vi) T3-treated, spinal cord-transected animals at
3 days and 1 week (regeneration-inhibitory conditions). Employing
stringent filtering criteria (see Materials and methods), we identified
genes from each group whose expression changed significantly
relative to the unoperated, methimazole-treated, reference control
group. In total, 202, 331 and 275 transcripts [which included
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) as well as annotated and prospective
genes] were identified as differentially expressed from the 3-day,
1-week and 3-week timepoints of the methimazole-treated groups,
respectively. The number of up- and down-regulated transcript were
approximately equal at each timepoint, with the exception of the 3-day
timepoint, at which only 26% of the transcripts exhibiting significant
changes were upregulated. For the T3-treated groups, 1961 and 1680
transcripts were identified as differentially expressed for the 3-day and
1-week timepoints, respectively. Again, the numbers of up- and down-
regulated genes were approximately equal in these arrays. Fifteen
genes that sampled the full range of fold-changes from low (1.8-fold)
to high (13.6-fold) were selected for validation by qRT-PCR. All 15
exhibited changes in expression by qRT-PCR (Table 1) that followed
the same trend as the microarray data although, due to differences in
the nature of the methods, their changes were generally greater in
magnitude than was seen on the arrays (see Discussion).
The full set of genes whose expressions changed significantly is
presented in Supporting Information Tables 1 and 2. For our
discussion here, we concentrate on those that were upregulated,
primarily with methimazole treatment, because we wanted to see
whether this paradigm could be used to highlight specifically those
genes associated with successful regeneration. Such genes would be
expected to be upregulated under regeneration-permissive (methimaz-
ole-treated, post-injury) conditions and not under regeneration-inhib-
itory conditions (T3-treated, post-injury). There were 53, 162 and 133
transcripts upregulated at the 3-day, 1-week, and 3-week timepoints,
respectively, in this category. Only the 72 that were either annotated in
the Xenopus database or could be identified by BLAST search as
prospective homologs to known genes in other systems are listed;
ESTs and transcripts that have no known function or homolog from
which a function could be inferred are not listed (Table 2).
The first five genes listed [suppressor of cytokine signaling 2
(SOCS2), XER81, neurotensin (NTS), MORC3 and RNA polymer-
ase II subunit 5-mediating protein (RMP)] may be particularly
relevant to successful regeneration. These genes were upregulated
under regeneration-permissive conditions (methimazole) but down-
regulated under inhibitory conditions (T3-treated). The next eight were
those that increased in expression under regeneration-permissive
conditions relative to inhibitory ones at more than one timepoint after
transection, suggesting that they may be important for maintaining the
axonal growth-active state. Three of these were transcription factors
[myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C), FOS and teashirt zinc finger 3
(TSHZ3)]; the other five [axial protocadherin (AXPC), RAS protein
activator-like 2 (RASAL2), HSPC150, TRIO, and a gene homologous
to C2orf37] have putative roles in intracellular signaling or cell–cell
communication. The remaining 59 transcripts are listed according to
the timepoint when their expression increased. Collectively, these
latter genes included seven transcription factors, fifteen membrane
proteins, eleven intracellular signaling proteins, three cell–cell signal-
ing proteins and four nuclear proteins involved with transcriptional
regulation. An additional seventeen fell into other functional catego-
ries, and two additional genes were of unknown function.
We also looked at those genes upregulated after injury under
regeneration-inhibitory conditions (T3-treated). We anticipated that
there would be many more genes upregulated in this group than with
methimazole treatment, as this group would include both those genes
activated by TH and those activated by the injury; this was indeed
the case. At 3 days and 1 week after transection, 880 and 758
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 15
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
A A′ A′′
B B′ B′′
C C′ C′′
Fig. 5. Regenerating axons follow radial glia
across the lesion site in untreated (A–A¢¢) and
methimazole-treated (B–B¢¢), but not in T3-treated
(C–C¢¢) tadpoles. Axons and radial glia are labeled
by immunostaining for NF-M (green, A–C) and
BLBP (red, A¢–C¢), respectively. Channels are
shown separately in A–C and A¢–C¢ and are
merged in A¢¢–C¢¢. Each image represents a single
optical section [A, B – 20 ·, 0.75 NA; 0.3, 0.3,
2.1 lm (x, y, z). C – 20 ·, 0 ⁄ 75 NA; 0.5, 0.5,
2.1 lm (x, y, z)] of a parasagittal anatomical
section; rostral is to the left. The lesion site is
indicated by a horizontal bracket.
A B C
D E F
Fig. 4. Serotonergic axons crossing the lesion site in a methimazole-treated tadpole at 5 weeks. Parasagittal cryosections were immunostained for NF-M (green) to
label axons, and for serotonin (red) to identify axons within the descending tracts originating from reticular and raphe nuclei (see text). (A and B) A low-power view
[20 ·, 0.75 NA; one optical section – 1.3, 1.3, 2.1 lm (x, y, z)] of a parasagittal section through the spinal cord of an unoperated animal to illustrate the presence of
serotonergic axons within the descending tract. NF-M (A, green) and serotonin (B, red) immunostraining are shown separately. (C) A low-power view [20 ·, 0.75
NA; one optical section – 0.9, 0.9, 2.1 lm (x, y, z)] of descending axons crossing the lesion site (boxed region). NF-M (green) and serotonin (red) immunostaining
are superimposed. (D–F) View of the boxed region in C at higher magnification [63 ·, 1.4 NA; one optical section – 0.14, 0.14, 0.3 lm (x, y, z)], with NF-M (green)
and serotonin (red) immunostaining viewed separately in D and E, respectively, and superimposed in F. Arrows point to examples of axons double-labeled for NF-M
and serotonin. Dorsal is up, and rostral is to the left. Scale bar in A also applies to B, and that in D also applies to E and F.
16 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
transcripts, respectively, (including ESTs) were upregulated by our
filtering criteria. Because of their large number, we present here
(Table 3) only a subset of these genes that we think will be of
particular interest to the readership. The complete list of annotated
and deduced homolog genes is presented in Supporting Information.
Among those listed are known TH response genes (e.g. Lzip8, Bteb1,
Dio3, Collagenase 3, Gene 16, NFIX2), whose presence served to
validate the drug treatment paradigm. Still others could potentially
play a role in affecting axon regeneration, either through their known
involvement in established relevant mechanisms or because they
represent factors previously identified as being involved in transcrip-
tion, tissue remodeling, chromatin modification or signal transduction
(see Discussion). Table 4 presents those genes whose expressions
increased with both methimazole and T3 treatment after spinal cord
transection. Their increased expression under both treatments
suggests that they are related to either a generalized injury response
or to stress.
Expression of GAP-43, peripherin and NF-M in the no-injury
condition
Three genes often associated with axonal growth in other systems were
noticeably absent from the transcripts that were upregulated after
transection under regeneration permissive conditions – GAP-43 (Skene
et al., 1986), the middle neurofilament protein (Jacobs et al., 1997;
Gervasi et al., 2003) and peripherin (also known as plasticin in fish)
(Asch et al., 1998; Gervasi et al., 2003). In the anamniote visual
system, these genes generally exhibit a stereotypical temporal expres-
sion pattern after optic nerve injury that correlates with regenerative
success. GAP-43 and peripherin are upregulated soon after injury and
return to pre-injury levels when regeneration is complete. NF-M is
initially downregulated, then rises to supranormal levels during the
peak period of axonal regrowth, and eventually returns to normal levels
of expression when regeneration is complete. These same genes are
also usually upregulated during developmental axonal outgrowth.
Although their expressions fluctuated after spinal cord transection, the
changes in expression seen for these genes failed to meet our criteria for
significance for any of the operated groups (Fig. 7).
We considered two possible explanations for this result:
(i) regenerative changes in the reticular and raphe neurons were too
small to be detected biochemically from whole hindbrain; and
(ii) larval tadpoles express these genes at a level consistent with
hindbrain motor neurons being in a growth-primed state, allowing
them to maintain the CNS plasticity required during metamorphosis.
To determine how the expression of these genes changed in hindbrain
neurons that regenerate, we performed in situ hybridization on spinal
cord-transected tadpoles and age-matched controls, both without drug
treatment. These experiments revealed that all three genes were
already expressed abundantly in raphe and reticular neurons of
unoperated tadpoles and confirmed that their expressions did not
change appreciably in these neurons with injury. Thus, these data
favored the second possible interpretation.
Discussion
Our data indicated that tadpoles could regenerate axons across a spinal
cord lesion and functionally recover when metamorphosis was
pharmacologically arrested. Conversely, pharmacologically accelerat-
ing metamorphosis led to the failure of axons to regrow and to
paralysis. Thus, prometamorphosis is not a requirement for successful
recovery from spinal cord injury, whereas prematurely accelerating
metamorphosis is sufficient to inhibit it.
Fig. 6. Influence of TH on the functional recovery of spinal-mediated behaviors. Xenopus laevis tadpoles (NF stage 51–53) received complete spinal cord
transection and were allowed to recover with no drug treatment (n = 3), 1 mm methimazole treatment (n = 14) or treatment with 5 nm T3 (n = 18). At 1 day and
1 week (no drug, methimazole, T3), and at 2 and 3 weeks (no drug, methimazole), behaviors were visually scored for each animal as being either absent (1), present
but abnormal (2), or qualitatively normal (3). These scores were then averaged over each group; bars are SEM. Treatment regimens and behaviors are as described in
the text. Downward-facing brackets indicate statistically significant (two-sided Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney U-test) pairwise comparisons within each time point.
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 17
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
Nearly all vertebrates exhibit at least some ability to regenerate
spinal cord axons during embryonic development. Recovery in these
developing animals may involve both axon regeneration and the
de novo establishment of parallel neural pathways (Ten Donkelaar,
2000). Sequential application of two different dyes that are taken up
specifically by cut axons provides direct evidence for regeneration
(Zhang & McClellan, 1999). Indeed, such an approach has demon-
strated in Xenopus tadpoles that raphe and reticular axons regenerate
reliably (Gibbs & Szaro, 2006). This double labeling study validated
an earlier approach utilizing immunostaining for serotonin as evidence
for regeneration (Beattie et al., 1990; Ten Donkelaar, 2000). The basis
for this second approach is that serotonergic axons of the ventral tract
principally originate from reticular and raphe neurons. Because the
serotonergic neurons in these nuclei are born well before the time of
transection, any such axons appearing within the lesion site are
unlikely to represent parallel projections arising de novo (van Mier &
Ten Donkelaar, 1984). The use of double labeling was precluded in the
present study because methimazole and T3 treatment resulted in
animals that were less robust, and survival periods were not long
enough to allow for the second round of labeling. Given the validity of
using serotonin immunostaining as an indication of regeneration in
untreated animals, along with the observation that arresting metamor-
phosis also inhibits the proliferation of neurons that might potentially
contribute to de novo pathways (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 2004), we
felt that the presence of serotonergic axons crossing the lesion site in
methimazole-treated tadpoles provides strong evidence for axon
regeneration.
Our findings also indicate that although prometamorphosis is not
necessary for recovery it may nonetheless help promote it. Tadpoles
undergoing no drug treatment exhibited more rapid and complete
reconstitution of the injured spinal cord, more NF-M-positive axons
crossing the lesion, and more rapid functional recovery than did
those treated with methimazole. Untreated tadpoles develop normally
and thus synthesize low levels of TH during the first week after
surgery, which might facilitate recovery. The wide ranging effects of
TH suggest a number of possible mechanisms for this. As TH
increases brain metabolism (Denver et al., 1997), some of its effects
could be due simply to increased metabolic rate. TH also promotes
neuro- and gliogenesis (Kollros, 1981; Marsh-Armstrong et al.,
2004; Denver, 2008), both of which could accelerate recovery.
Increased gliogenesis in particular could have contributed to the
improved wound healing and tissue remodeling that was seen in
untreated tadpole, as well as the more uniform BLBP staining that
filled the lesion site of T3-treated tadpoles. TH is also known to
affect the expression of extracellular matrix proteins such as
fibronectin and integrins (Brown et al., 1996) as well as tissue
remodeling enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinases (Shi &
Brown, 1993; Wang & Brown, 1993; Damjanovski et al., 1999).
Indeed, collagenase 3, a matrix metallopoteinase (MMP 13), was
upregulated on T3 arrays but absent from methimazole arrays.
Although T3-treated tadpoles exhibited many similarities with
juveniles in their response to spinal cord transection, they differed in
some respects, such as in the appearance of the wound at 1 week.
Typically, TH levels rise from stages 54 to 61, then decline to adult
Table 1. Microarray validation
Gene name Primers
Fold change
Microarray qRT-PCR
SOCS2 (F) GTGGCTGGTGAA GCCACTAT 1.9 3.5
(R) TGTTCCAATGCTTAACTGATG
Neurotensin (F) GAGGAACCAGAAGAAACTGG 2.0 7.4
(R) ACTGTTTGGGCTGTTAGGTT
XER81 (F) GCAAGAAAATCTTCCTCCTACA 1.8 3.4
(R) CAAGGAGTGCTTGCTGTATC
RPB5 (F) TCCCAAGAAGTTCGAGAATC 1.8 2.8
(R) TCAACTGTGTGCAGAAAATG
XPcl-2 (F) AGCATGGAGCAGAGTAATCA 2.8 6.4
(R) TGAGGCATAGGTCCCATAGT
TRIO (F) AGTTGATCCTTCCCAGCTAA 2.0 4.8
(R) TTGCAAGCATCTCCTGTAGT
FGF8b (F) AATTTCCTGAACTCCTTTGC 2.0 9.3
(R) CACAACATTT TTGCTCATCA
Tsh3 (F) CACAAACTAAATCCCCTTCTG 2.3 3.2
(R) GTGATCCTCGGGTGATTT
Bteb-1a (F) TTTCTCGTTCCGATGAGTTA 13 4181*
(R) TCAGGTGAATGATGAATTGG
Fizzy1 (F) ACACTGCTCGAGTGCTTAAT 2.5 17
(R) AGTTTGTTCATCGGATGCTT
Activin Beta b (F) TCACATACACTGGACAGGAA 4.4 42
(R) GTGGACTCAGTGCAAAACAT
Insulin induced gene-1 (F) GTGGGAAGGGAAATCATGT 1.9 24
(R) ATCCACTTTTTGGGATTCAG
MCpGBP (F) TTTCTGTGGAGAAATACCTGTT 2.7 77
(R) GCAATTAGTAGCTTGAAAAAGTTC
ZNF395 (F) AATCT TCGCT ACACG GAAGT )12 )2.4
(R) TTGAGGAGGTTAAAATGTACG
C3H-1 (F) TGTGTCCTACCTCACAGTTACA )2.3 )1.5
(R) ACACATTAGAAGAAGCACACTTT
Genes used to validate microarray data as being differentially expressed. Fifteen genes identified by microarray analysis as having a change in expression ‡ 1.8-fold
were validated using qRT-PCR. Genes were selected to represent both methimazole- and T3-treated groups across a broad range of expression values. An asterisk (*)
is used to denote extremely large changes in expression due to the absence of detectable expression in control vs. experimental samples.
18 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
Table 2. Genes upregulated in methimazole-treated spinal cord-transected tadpole
Unigene Category Gene name
M T3
3d 1w 3w 3d 1w
Xl.50377 CP ⁄ ICS SOCS2 1.9 1.9 )1.8
Xl.47572 CCS ⁄ L Neurotensin ⁄ neuromedin N 2.0 )3.0 )2.5
Xl.33162 NP HP: MORC3 1.9 )2.0 )2.3
Xl.76067 TF XER81 1.8 )2.2
Xl.47364 NP ⁄ Transc Similar to RPB5-mediating protein 1.8 )1.8
Xl.47612 TF MEF2C 2.3 2.9 2.5
Xl.63092 CCS ⁄MR Axial protocadherin 1.8 2.2
Xl.10283 TF V-fos 1.8 2.0
Xl.9022 TF Tsh3 2.3 2.4 2.1
Xl.50386 ICS HP: RAS protein activator like 2 2.2 1.8
Xl.12282 ICS ⁄ UB HSPC150 1.8 1.9
Xl.57698 Uncharacterized HP: C20rf37 homolog 2.0 1.9
Xl.50094 ICS HP: TRIO 2.1 2.0
Xl.30 TF v-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 2.7
Xl.14315 NP Predicted: JAR1D2 2.6
Xl.77217 Uncharacterized HP: C10rf174 homolog 2.4
Xl.53666 MP Similar to CCDC51 2.3
Xl.57336 ICS HP: Casein kinase 1, c3, 2 2.1
Xl.21708 rRNAP HP: Tsr2 2.0
Xl.12384 ICS ⁄ UB Similar to: Vpr-binding protein 2.0
Xl.29378 ER PDI A6 2.0
Xl.51787 MP HP: SLC19A2 1.9
Xl.4290 MP ⁄ ICS HP: PAF 1.9
Xl.968 ICS ⁄ UB BTRC-a 1.8
Xl.58749 MP ⁄ IF HP: MHC class II beta-chain 1.8
Xl.34346 TF Predicted: Homeo box D4 5.7
Xl.52966 TF Polycomblike 2 2.8
Xl.21606 MP ⁄ IF T-cell receptor alpha 2.6
Xl.78192 MP ⁄Mito HP: SMCR7L 2.4
Xl.75878 ICS HP: NEDD4 binding protein 2 2.4
Xl.14717 MP HP: Transmembrane protein 30A 2.3
Xl.2761 NP ⁄ Transc HP: NCOR1 2.3
Xl.47451 MP ⁄Mito Outer membrane protein 25 2.1
Xl.57242 ICP ⁄Met HP: ATAD2B 2.0
Xl.20011 CCS ⁄ L FGF-8b 2.0
Xl.50196 NP HP: SH3BGRL2 1.8
Xl.48897 ICS ⁄ UB MGC85526 protein: ASB5 1.8
Xl.47315 MP ⁄ CA MGC80200 protein: NCAM2 (Nr-Cam) 1.8
Xl.66298 ER ER-resident kinase PERK 1.8
Xl.21608 MP ⁄ ICS Cannabinoid receptor 1 ⁄ CB1 1.8
Xl.59866 MP ⁄ ICS TMEFF2 1.8
Xl.71886 ICS Predicted: similar to CTNNAL1 5.3
Xl.688 TF Thyroid transcription factor 1 3.6
Xl.57018 CP HP: PHLDA2 3.0
Xl.29880 ICS HP: centaurin, alpha 1 2.6
Xl.21419 RNA met HP: SRRM1 2.6
Xl.564 MP ⁄ SV Synapsin IIa 2.4
Xl.65736 TF C-Fos a 2.3
Xl.50787 Mito PDP2 2.3
Xl.47578 ICS HP: DOCK9 2.2
Xl.25798 Mito PCCA 2.1
Xl.48881 Uncharacterized Predicted: similar to FAM135B 2.1
Xl.9988 IC ⁄ Ptase HP: PRSS16 2.0
Xl.52035 ICS Mdm4 protein 2.0
Xl.68850 RNABP HP: RBM 42 1.9
Xl.21633 MP GRIK2 1.9
Xl.2599 RNAmet SF3B1 1.9
Xl.48462 ICS HP: LRRK2 1.9
Xl.41591 TF HP: HDGF 1.9
Xl.637 TF EGR 1 1.9
Xl.23598 CCS ⁄ L Tgfb2-A 1.9
Xl.23524 ICP HSD17B6 1.9
Xl.34486 MP ⁄ ICS HP: PLEKHB2 1.9
Xl.13872 CCS Slit homolog 1 1.9
Xl.54918 ICP ⁄ Ptase HP: similar to DPP8 1.8
Xl.56564 CP ⁄Met HP: PYGM 1.8
Xl.55591 CP ⁄ Cyskl HP: similar to radixin 1.8
Xl.23550 CP ⁄Motor HP: Kif19 1.8
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 19
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
levels (Leloup and Buscaglia, 1977; Simon et al., 2002). The tight
temporal control of TH production, together with variations in TH
responsiveness among individual tissues, ensures the correct devel-
opmental expression of genes required for metamorphosis (Etkin &
Gilbert, 1968; Dodd & Dodd, 1976; Shi, 2000). Exposure to 5 nm T3
accelerates this process, but not instantaneously. For example, it takes
2–3 days of exposing premetamorphic tadpoles to 5 nm T3 for the
hormones prolactin and somatostatin, whose syntheses are controlled
by TH, to reach the levels typical of metamorphic climax (Buckbinder
& Brown, 1993). Such a delay in the time needed for T3 to elicit its
full effects could therefore have contributed to differences in wound
healing seen between T3-treated tadpoles and untreated juveniles.
Molecular data from the T3 arrays support this possibility. Silencing
Mediator for Retinoid and Thyroid receptors (SMRT) is part of the
transcriptional repressor complex that is recruited by TH receptors
(and other nuclear hormone receptors) and relieved by TH binding
(Horlein et al., 1995). Its expression should be suppressed by TH, as
was indeed the case at 1 week. However, at 3 days it was still present
in T3-treated animals, suggesting that TH levels in hindbrain were still
insufficient to reduce its expression. These differences between T3-
treated tadpoles and untreated juveniles notwithstanding, T3 treatment
clearly altered the injury response significantly by transforming
regeneration-permissive larval conditions into inhibitory ones. These
observations thus strengthen the causal connection between the
cascade of events triggered by rising levels of TH, which drives the
transformation from the larval to the adult form, and the develop-
mental loss of regenerative capacity in spinal cord.
Thus, it can be argued that in Xenopus it is the maintenance of
larval features that is needed for spinal cord axon regeneration. The
ability of amniotes to recover from spinal cord injury is also lost at
some point during development, suggesting that certain larval
features may also be important for promoting recovery among the
so-called ‘higher’ vertebrates. One such larval feature is the presence
of radial glia which, in amniotes, are characteristically more
prominent in the developing than in the adult CNS. Radial glia,
which express BLBP (Feng et al., 1994), form scaffolds for
migrating neurons and guide growing axons during mammalian
development (Norris & Kalil, 1991). In mammals, BLBP-expressing
embryonic radial glia promote spinal cord axon regeneration as well
as decreased expression of growth-inhibitory factors (Hasegawa
et al., 2005); in turtle, they appear to guide regrowing axons in
transected spinal cord, which exhibits axonal regrowth (Rehermann
et al., 2009). Consistent with these observations in amniotes, axons
crossing the lesion site in untreated and in methimazole-treated
tadpoles frequently co-localized with BLBP-positive radial glial
fibers; however, with T3 treatment, BLBP was abundantly expressed
within the lesion site but did not co-localize with axons (NF-M).
These results suggest that T3 treatment impaired the capacity of
axons to regenerate and of radial glia to facilitate this regeneration
without impairing the ability of radial glia to invade the lesion site
during wound healing.
Based on our results, we also concluded that the developmental loss
of axonal regenerative capacity in Xenopus spinal cord occurred as a
direct consequence of the developmental events triggered by rising
levels of TH. Our data are consistent with a model wherein the low
levels of TH present early in prometamophosis help to promote wound
healing through increased gliogenesis but later lead to the inability of
hindbrain neurons to activate the axonal growth program as TH levels
rise during metamorphic climax. Rising TH levels also correlate with
the loss of forelimb regenerative potential in Xenopus tadpoles, with
complete loss occurring at metamorphic climax (Dent, 1962).
However, rising levels of TH probably also work in concert with
cell type-specific levels of sensitivity and responsiveness to TH in
determining regenerative capacity, as retinal ganglion cells in Xenopus
maintain their capacity to regenerate an axon throughout life (Taylor
et al., 1989). In anuran CNS development, TH stimulates extensive
tissue remodeling through neuro- and gliogenesis, apoptosis, and
increased myelination, all directed toward accommodating the adult
form (Weiss & Rosetti, 1951; Kollros, 1981; Will, 1986; Ten
Donkelaar, 2000; Marsh-Armstrong et al., 2004). Brain development
in amniotes during late fetal and post natal stages also critically
depends on TH (Howdeshell, 2002). Interestingly, the loss of
regenerative capacity of spinal cord axons in both chick and rodent
occurs after the onset of TH exposure. Chicks begin producing TH
endogenously at E10 and lose spinal cord axon regenerative capacity
at E13 (Hasan et al., 1993; Muchow et al., 2005); rats become
exposed to maternal TH at E9 leading to a steady rise in circulating
TH levels, and they lose regenerative capacity by E15 (Saunders et al.,
1992; Howdeshell, 2002). Thus, the negative effects of high levels of
TH on regeneration of spinal cord axons seen here in Xenopus could
also have implications for the loss of regenerative capacity in
amniotes.
Table 2. Continued.
Unigene Category Gene name
M T3
3d 1w 3w 3d 1w
Xl.47139 NP ⁄ Transc HP SMARCC2 1.8
Xl.14482 NP ⁄ Transc Wilms tumor 1 interacting protein 1.8
Xl.55111 NP ⁄ Transc HP: TRIP 11 1.8
Xl.29836 MP ⁄ ICS Proprotein convertase 4 1.8
Genes upregulated in hindbrain following spinal cord transection under regeneration-permissive conditions (methimazole-treated). Hindbrains of methimazole-
treated tadpoles were harvested and analyzed by arrays at 3 days (3d), 1 week (1w) and 3 weeks (3w) following complete spinal cord transection. The fold-change
relative to methimazole-treated, unoperated control is listed under each relevant timepoint. Fold increases and decreases are positive and negative, respectively.
Unlisted values indicate either a < 1.8-fold change or one that was statistically nonsignificant. The first five were upregulated with methimazole (M) and
downregulated with T3 treatment. The next eight were upregulated with methimazole at all timepoints. The remaining were upregulated at only the indicated
timepoint. Each gene is designated by its UniGene ID (left column). Gene names and function were assigned as described in Materials and methods. Abbreviations:
CA, cell adhesion; CCS, cell-cell signaling molecule; CP, cytoplasmic protein; cyskl, cytoskeletal protein; ER, endoplasmic reticular protein; ICP, intracellular
protein; ICS, intracellular signaling molecule; IF, immune function; L, receptor ligand; Met, metabolism; Mito, mitochondrial protein; motor, motor protein; MP,
membrane protein; MR, membrane receptor; NP, nuclear protein; RNA BP, RNA binding protein; RNA met, RNA metabolism; rRNAP, ribosomal RNA protein; SV,
synaptic vesicle component; TF, transcription factor; Transc, gene involved in transcription; UB, involved in ubiquitination; Uncharacterized, function un-
characterized.
20 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
Expression profiling
Gene expression profiling on microarrays provided direct evidence for
intrinsic changes in hindbrain neurons during a successful regenerative
response to spinal cord injury. Treatment of tadpoles with methim-
azole permitted for the first time the analysis of changes in gene
expression during regeneration in the absence of background changes
resulting from ongoing development. Structural genes that typically
increase with axon outgrowth in other systems [e.g. GAP43 (Jacobson
et al., 1986; Skene et al., 1986) and peripherin (Gervasi et al., 2003)]
were found already abundantly expressed in hindbrain of normally
developing tadpole at these stages, by both microarray and in situ
Table 3. Genes upregulated in T3-treated spinal cord-transected tadpole
Unigene Category Gene name T3, 3d T3, 1w
Xl.453 TF Leucine zipper gene 8 27.8 16.4
Xl.353 ECP Collagenase-3 15.8 18.6
Xl.347 TF Bteb 1a (KLF9) 13.6 8.5
Xl.13228 NP Centromere protein N 9.7
Xl.54050 CCS ⁄ L HP: BMP 6 8.4 5.2
Xl.8196 MP SLC15A2 6.4 2.0
Xl.862 MP Deiodinase, iodothyronine, type III 6.3 3.4
Xl.3204 ICP ⁄ ER Heavy-chain binding protein BiP 5.0 2.3
Xl.1090 SP Activin Beta b 4.4 4.1
Xl.25391 NP HP: Apoptosis-enhancing nuclease 4.0
Xl.2213 CP ⁄ ICS HP: SOCS 3 4.0
Xl.21563 MP ⁄Mito TGM2 4.0 4.5
Xl.55631 SP HP: TIMP 3 3.9 2.0
Xl.77410 NP HP: IFRD1 3.7
Xl.73282 MP ⁄Golgi HP: RAB36 3.5 2.9
Xl.16548 CCS HP: Netrin 1 3.4 2.5
Xl.70833 CP Methionine-tRNA synthetase 3.2
Xl.4203 ICP ABCF2 3.0 2.0
Xl.57034 TF Nuclear factor I-C1 3.0
Xl.48217 CP Heat shock protein 105 2.9 2.2
Xl.481 TF Zinc finger protein Gli2 2.9
Xl.55978 Uncharacterized HP: Similar to ZNF 711 2.8
Xl.8364 NP MBD3 2.7 2.0
Xl.33920 NP MGC84310: CHMP2B 2.7 2.6
Xl.620 SP Wnt inhibitor Frzb3-like 2.6 2.3
Xl.357 ICP Gene 16 2.6
Xl.3026 CP ⁄ ICS Adenylate kinase 7 2.6 2.2
Xl.4938 NP Fizzy1 (CDC20) 2.5
Xl.20608 MP Transmembrane protein 177 2.5
Xl.693 CP ⁄ ICS CaM kinase II gamma 2.4 2.7
Xl.1099 MP ⁄ ICS Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase beta.11 2.4 2.7
Xl.3540 MP ⁄ ICS p75-like transmembrane protein fullback 2.3
Xl.1396 TF Forkhead box protein 2.2 2.2
Xl.14056 CP ⁄ ICS RAN GTPase activating protein 1 2.2
Xl.7678 NP ⁄ Transc HP: REST corepressor 2 2.1 1.9
Xl.25554 CP ⁄ ICS MGC80232 SOCS1a 2.1
Xl.23295 NP Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 2.0
Xl.60871 CP HP: HSPA (Heat shock 70 kDa) binding protein 2.0
Xl.25554 CP ⁄ ICS HP: SOCS1 2.0
Xl.48463 MP ⁄ ER Insulin induced gene 1 1.9
Xl.26031 TF Activating transcription factor 5 1.9
Xl.973 TF Homeobox protein Xgbx-2 2.9
Xl.50412 CP HP: chondroitin 4 sulfotransferase 11 2.3
Xl.21537 MP ⁄ ICS Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase Rho precursor 2.2
Xl.21440 MP Metalloprtease ⁄ disintegrin xMDC11.1 2.2
Xl.21565 MP ⁄ ICS Neural cell adhesion molecule L1 2.2
Xl.54777 CP ⁄ ICS Intersectin 2.1
Xl.741 CP ⁄ ICS Smad8C protein 2.0
Xl.166 MP ADAM 13 2.0
Xl.1096 TF NFI-X2 transcription factor 2.0
Xl.48321 MP ⁄ ICS FGF receptor-like protein 2.0
Xl.41403 CP ⁄UB F-box protein 11 2.0
Xl.21607 MP ⁄ ICS Thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor 3 2.0
Xl.78076 ICS Nerve injury gene 283 1.9
Xl.23456 CP Neurochondrin 1.9
Xl.79277 CP ⁄ ICS Hypothetical protein: RhoGap68f 1.8
Xl.3801 ICS Neuronal nitric oxide synthase 1 1.8
Xl.58616 TF Zinc finger, MYND domain-containing 10 1.8
Xl.76580 NP HP: Suppressor of zeste 12 homolog 1.8
Selective genes upregulated in hindbrain after spinal cord transection under regeneration inhibitory conditions (T3-treated). Abbreviations and other details are as in
Table 2. See Supporting Information for the full listing.
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 21
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
hybridization. These data are consistent with the idea that the larval
state of tadpoles is already conducive to regeneration and, as such,
elevated expression of these structural genes need not be induced
de novo with injury. Nevertheless, spinal cord transection was
sufficient to induce specific sets of new genes and inhibit still others
in the methimazole-treated maintained larval state.
Five genes in particular increased after injury in the methimazole-
treated (regeneration-permissive) condition and were selectively
A
B
Fig. 7. GAP-43, peripherin and NF-M expression in hindbrain after spinal cord transection. (A) Microarray data indicating that no significant change in expression
of these mRNAs took place. Abbreviations – M, methimazole-treated; T3, T3-treated; 3D, 3 days; 1W, 1 week; and 3W, 3 weeks after spinal cord transection. (B) In
situ hybridization with digoxigenin-labeled cRNA probes to GAP-43, peripherin and NF-M in transverse sections of hindbrain without drug treatment, at the
indicated times after spinal cord transection and in age-matched uninjured controls. Hybridized probes were visualized by immunohistochemistry with an alkaline
phosphatase-labeled antidigoxigenin antibody. Expression in reticular neurons (circle), which are known to regenerate an axon under these conditions, is equivalent
for all three genes between operated and unoperated tadpoles, suggesting these neurons were already in a ‘growth-primed’ state prior to the injury. The calibration bar
in the GAP-43, unoperated, 1-day panel applies to all panels.
Table 4. Genes upregulated in methimazole- and T3-treated spinal cord-transected tadpole
Unigene Category Gene Name
M T3
3d 1w 3w 3d 1w
Xl.74164 ICP ⁄Mito Similar to: CDKN2D 4.3 5.4
LOC733250 MP HP: Glycoprotein NMB 2.7 2.0 2.5 3.1
MGC132043 CCS ⁄ L HP: Tachykinin 1 isoform 1 2.0 1.8
Xl.21031 MP ⁄ ICS PTPRD 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.3
Xl.28411 NP HP: NCOR2 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.7
Xl.48433 CP HP: Hook3 3.0 2.9 2.2
Xl.826 TF Myc-A 1.8 1.9 2.0
Xl.9047 TF Homeobox C5 5.5 6.8
Xl.8804 TF HP: CBX 6 2.2 2.0
Xl.82524 ICP HP: Cathepsin S 3.7 3.5
Xl.18619 ICP HP: Similar to LIPE 1.8 2.0
Xl.77747 NP ⁄ Transc HP: Prdm2 protein 2.4 2.9
Xl.32812 CP ⁄ Syn Rabphilin 3A homolog 2.0 1.8
Xl.6687 CP Similar to: BLBP 2.8 6.0 2.4
Xl.12862 MP ⁄Apop MFGE8 1.8 1.9 3.2
Xl.60293 NP ⁄ Transc HP: TR beta B2 2.2 3.6 2.2
Xl.1109 MP Gap Junction a1, 43 kDa 1.8 3.4
Xl.24560 Sec HP: a-2-HS-glycoprotein 2.1 2.0 2.0
Xl.5377 MP Similar to: P4HB 1.8 2.6 2.0
Xl.82105 MP HP: Similar to CYP26C1 3.2 3.0 3.2 7.1
Genes upregulated in both methimazole- and T3-treated tadpoles following complete spinal cord transection. Abbreviations and other details are as in Table 2.
22 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
downregulated in the T3-treated (regeneration-inhibitory) condition –
SOCS2, XER81, MORC3, NTS and RMP. Interestingly, four of these
five have known functions consistent with promoting neuronal
development, survival and neurite outgrowth: (i) SOCS2 promotes
neurite outgrowth in cortical neurons and in PC12 cells, where its
expression inhibits RhoA and activates Rac1 through the SOCS2-
mediated phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) (Goldshmit et al., 2004); (ii) XER81 is a transcription factor
expressed by mammalian corticospinal neurons that is required for
establishing correct sensory–motor connectivity in developing spinal
cord (Arber et al., 2000; Hevner et al., 2003); (iii) Morc3 is a nuclear
protein shown to activate p53 (Takahashi et al., 2007), which is
necessary for neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons and for facial
nerve regeneration (Di Giovanni et al., 2006); (iv) NTS is a
neuropeptide that antagonizes the binding of proNGF to the sortilin
receptor (Mazella et al., 1998; Nykjaer et al., 2004) which in the CNS
is a co-receptor with p75 receptor for proNGF; proNGF binding to this
receptor complex promotes cell death. Thus, increased expression of
NTS could play a potent role in neuroprotection; and (v) The fifth gene
in this group, RMP, although not previously associated with neurite
outgrowth and neuroprotection, is a transcriptional repressor that
works in combination with DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dmap1;
Delgermaa et al., 2004). It may therefore be involved in regulating
downstream genes important for regeneration. The majority of the
remaining genes that were upregulated with methimazole and not with
T3 treatment have known functions in transcription and in cell
signaling as opposed to being purely structural genes. This entire list
presents a set of intriguing candidates for further studies aimed at
dissecting the functions and regulatory pathways of these genes during
injury.
With few exceptions, the magnitude of changes on the arrays was
always smaller than that seen with validation by qRT-PCR. This
phenomenon is common with array studies and thus the changes seen
on microarrays should not be taken as quantitative measures of gene
expression. Such measurements, particularly in a tissue as complex as
hindbrain, are best done by qRT-PCR on samples recovered by laser-
capture microdissection from the regenerating neurons themselves, a
technically difficult method that goes beyond the current study. It
should be noted that microarray studies have found changes as low as
1.5-fold to be biologically significant (Das et al., 2009; Paulsen et al.,
2009), and thus our cutoff of 1.8-fold can be considered conservative.
T3 arrays were performed primarily to aid in the interpretation of
the methimazole arrays. For example, the increased expression of
many known TH-responsive genes on the arrays helped serve to
validate the T3 treatment paradigm [e.g. Leucine zipper gene 8,
Gene 16 and collagenase 3 (Brown et al., 1996), Bteb (Denver et al.,
1997), Dio III (St.Germain et al., 1994) and Nfi-x2 (Buchholz et al.,
2007)]. These genes were among those with the most robust
responses. Next, we expected that genes associated more with injury
and stress than with axon regeneration would be upregulated in both.
Indeed, the known function of several such genes is consistent with
this prediction. Tachykinin1 is a neuropeptide that is cleaved to
produce other neuropeptides, including substance P, which is an
important component of the response to pain and inflammation during
CNS injury (Knerlich-Lukoschus et al., 2008). Cathepsin S is a
protease involved with antigen presentation in the microglial-mediated
immune response (Nakanishi, 2003). AHSG is activated in multiple
tissues, including brain, in response to chemically induced injury
(Yoshida et al., 1999). P4HB is a chaperone that is upregulated as a
stress response gene; PTPRD (Johnson et al., 2001) and L1 (Becker
et al., 1998) expression may represent an attempt by the damaged
nervous system to initiate axon outgrowth. Also, BLBP was
upregulated with both methimazole and T3 treatment, consistent with
a response by radial glia in both groups.
In addition to these sets of genes on T3 arrays was an interesting set
that, based on its members’ known functions, could play a role in
transforming the regeneration-permissive larval CNS into an inhibi-
tory environment. For example, the expression of both SOCS1 and
SOCS3 increased on T3 arrays. Both SOCS1 and SOCS3 inhibit
cytokine signaling, and their expression negatively regulates STAT3.
The inhibitory effects of SOCS1 and SOCS3 are directly counteracted
by SOCS2 (Piessevaux et al., 2006), whose expression increased
under regeneration-permissive (methimazole) and decreased under
regeneration-inhibitory (T3) conditions. Genes whose increased
expression on T3 arrays is consistent with known inhibition of
recovery from spinal cord injury include two additional genes: (i)
fullback, which is closely related to p75 and has been implicated in
dimerizing with other receptors to transmit growth inhibitory signals
leading to axonal growth inhibition (Hutson & Bothwell, 2001); and
(ii) ARHGAP1, a GTPase activator protein that inactivates the Rho
family members Rho, Rac and Cdc42. ARHGAP1 has preference for
Cdc42, which has been shown to promote neurite outgrowth
(Lancaster et al., 1994). Regardless of whether the genes that are
upregulated with T3 treatment are directly involved in the inhibition of
recovery from spinal cord injury or represent changes involved in the
transition from larval to juvenile forms, their sheer number argues that
the loss of regenerative capacity involves a change in developmental
state evoked in hindbrain by TH. It remains to be seen whether similar
changes take place at the injury site itself.
Taken together, these findings are consistent with TH being the
principal activator of a cascade of developmental events that leads
directly to the loss of the larval state and its attendant ability to execute
the axonal growth program needed for axonal regeneration and
functional recovery. Array studies indicated that both the response to
injury and the loss of regenerative capacity necessarily involves
multiple genes. Future studies aimed at characterizing the functions of
these genes, along with their expression control mechanisms, could
eventually lead to improved functional outcome from spinal cord
injury in mammals.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version
of this article:
Table S1. Genes differentially expressed in methimazole treated,
spinal cord transected animals.
Table S2. Genes Differentially expressed in T3-treated, spinal cord
transected animals.
Please note: As a service to our authors and readers, this journal
provides supporting information supplied by the authors. Such
materials are peer-reviewed and may be re-organized for online
delivery, but are not copy-edited or typeset by Wiley-Blackwell.
Technical support issues arising from supporting information (other
than missing files) should be addressed to the authors.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Christine Gervasi for help in animal rearing and editorial
comments, and the National Science Foundation (IOS 951043) and the New
York State Spinal Cord Injury Research Trust (NYSPHS C020940) for support.
We also thank Drs Nathaniel Heintz (Rockefeller University) and Virginia M.-
Y. Lee (Univ. Penn.) for the BLBP and NF-M antibodies, respectively.
Appreciation is also given to Chen Wang, Erica Hutchins and Yuanyuan Liu for
their help with the figures and for their suggestions for improving the text.
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 23
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
Abbreviations
BLBP, brain lipid binding protein; CNS, central nervous system; MS-222, ethyl
3-aminobenzoate methanesulfonate; NF-M, middle neurofilament protein;
NTS, neurotensin; PB, 0.1 m sodium phosphate, pH 7.4; qRT-PCR, quantita-
tive real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; RMP, RNA
polymerase II subunit 5-mediating protein; SOCS2, cytokine signaling 2; T3,
3,3¢,5-triiodo-L-thyronine; TBS, Tris-buffered saline; TH, thyroid hormone.
References
Arber, S., Ladle, D.R., Lin, J.H., Frank, E. & Jessell, T.M. (2000) ETS gene
Er81 controls the formation of functional connections between group Ia
sensory afferents and motor neurons. Cell, 101, 485–498.
Asch, W.S., Leake, D., Canger, A.K., Passini, M.A., Argenton, F. & Schechter,
N. (1998) Cloning of zebrafish neurofilament cDNAs for plasticin and
gefiltin: increased mRNA expression in ganglion cells after optic nerve
injury. J. Neurochem., 71, 20–32.
Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C. & Lopate, G. (1990) Metamorphosis alters the
response to spinal cord transection in Xenopus laevis frogs. J. Neurobiol., 21,
1108–1122.
Becker, T., Bernhardt, R.R., Reinhard, E., Wullimann, M.F., Tongiorgi, E. &
Schachner, M. (1998) Readiness of zebrafish brain neurons to regenerate a
spinal axon correlates with differential expression of specific cell recognition
molecules. J. Neurosci., 18, 5789–5803.
Brown, D.D. & Cai, L. (2007) Amphibian metamorphosis. Dev. Biol., 306, 20–
33.
Brown, D.D., Wang, Z., Kanamori, A., Eliceiri, B., Furlow, J.D. &
Schwartzman, R. (1995) Amphibian metamorphosis: a complex program
of gene expression changes controlled by the thyroid hormone. Recent Prog.
Horm. Res., 50, 309–315.
Brown, D.D., Wang, Z., Furlow, J.D., Kanamori, A., Schwartzman, R.A.,
Remo, B.F. & Pinder, A. (1996) The thyroid hormone-induced tail resorption
program during Xenopus laevis metamorphosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
93, 1924–1929.
Buchholz, D.R., Heimeier, R.A., Das, B., Washington, T. & Shi, Y.B. (2007)
Pairing morphology with gene expression in thyroid hormone-induced
intestinal remodeling and identification of a core set of TH-induced genes
across tadpole tissues. Dev. Biol., 303, 576–590.
Buckbinder, L. & Brown, D.D. (1993) Expression of the Xenopus laevis
prolactin and thyrotropin genes during metamorphosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 90, 3820–3824.
Consolazione, A., Milstein, C., Wright, B. & Cuello, A.C. (1981) Immuno-
cytochemical detection of serotonin with monoclonal antibodies. J. Histo-
chem. Cytochem., 29, 1425–1430.
Damjanovski, S., Ishizuya-Oka, A. & Shi, Y.B. (1999) Spatial and temporal
regulation of collagenases-3, -4, and stromelysin -3 implicates distinct
functions in apoptosis and tissue remodeling during frog metamorphosis.
Cell Res., 9, 91–105.
Das, B., Heimeier, R.A., Buchholz, D.R. & Shi, Y.B. (2009) Identification of
direct thyroid hormone response genes reveals the earliest gene regulation
programs during frog metamorphosis. J. Biol. Chem., 284, 34167–34178.
Delgermaa, L., Hayashi, N., Dorjsuren, D., Nomura, T., Thuy le, T.T. &
Murakami, S. (2004) Subcellular localization of RPB5-mediating protein and
its putative functional partner. Mol. Cell. Biol., 24, 8556–8566.
Dent, J.N. (1962) Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing individuals
of the South African clawed toad. J. Morphol., 110, 61–77.
Denver, R.J. (2008) Chordate metamorphosis: ancient control by iodothyro-
nines. Curr. Biol., 18, R567–R569.
Denver, R.J., Pavgi, S. & Shi, Y.B. (1997) Thyroid hormone-dependent gene
expression program for Xenopus neural development. J. Biol. Chem., 272,
8179–8188.
Di Giovanni, S., Knights, C.D., Rao, M., Yakovlev, A., Beers, J., Catania, J.,
Avantaggiati, M.L. & Faden, A.I. (2006) The tumor suppressor protein p53 is
requiredforneuriteoutgrowthandaxonregeneration.EMBOJ.,25,4084–4096.
Dodd, M.H.I. & Dodd, J.M. (1976) The biology of metamorphosis. In Lofts, B.
(Ed.), Physiology of the Amphibia. Academic Press, New York, pp. 467–576.
Etkin, W. & Gilbert, L.I. (1968) Metamorphosis. A Problem in Developmental
Biology. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.
Feng, L., Hatten, M.E. & Heintz, N. (1994) Brain lipid-binding protein
(BLBP): a novel signaling system in the developing mammalian CNS.
Neuron, 12, 895–908.
Forehand, C.J. & Farel, P.B. (1982) Anatomical and behavioral recovery from
the effects of spinal cord transection: dependence on metamorphosis in
anuran larvae. J. Neurosci., 2, 654–662.
Gervasi, C. & Szaro, B.G. (1997) Sequence and expression patterns of two
forms of the middle molecular weight neurofilament protein (NF-M) of
Xenopus laevis. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res., 48, 229–242.
Gervasi, C., Thyagarajan, A. & Szaro, B.G. (2003) Increased expression of
multiple neurofilament mRNAs during regeneration of vertebrate central
nervous system axons. J. Comp. Neurol., 461, 262–275.
Gibbs, K.M. & Szaro, B.G. (2006) Regeneration of descending projections in
Xenopus laevis tadpole spinal cord demonstrated by retrograde double
labeling. Brain Res., 1088, 68–72.
Goldshmit, Y., Walters, C.E., Scott, H.J., Greenhalgh, C.J. & Turnley, A.M.
(2004) SOCS2 induces neurite outgrowth by regulation of epidermal growth
factor receptor activation. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 16349–16355.
Gudernatsch, J.F. (1912) Feeding experiments in Tadpoles. I. The influence of
specific organs given as on growth and differentiation: a contribution to the
knowledge of organs with internal secretion. Arch. Ent.-mech. Org., 35, 457–
483.
Hasan, S.J., Keirstead, H.S., Muir, G.D. & Steeves, J.D. (1993) Axonal
regeneration contributes to repair of injured brainstem-spinal neurons in
embryonic chick. J. Neurosci., 13, 492–507.
Hasegawa, K., Chang, W.W., Li, H., Berlin, Y., Ikeda, O., Kane-Goldsmith, N.
& Grumet, M. (2005) Embryonic radial glia bridge spinal cord lesions and
promote functional recovery following spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol., 193,
394–410.
Hevner, R.F., Daza, R.A., Rubenstein, J.L., Stunnenberg, H., Olavarria, J.F. &
Englund, C. (2003) Beyond laminar fate: toward a molecular classification of
cortical projection ⁄ pyramidal neurons. Dev. Neurosci., 25, 139–151.
Hoperskaya, O.A. (1975) The development of animals homozygous for a
mutation causing periodic albinism (ap) in Xenopus laevis. J. Embryol. Exp.
Morphol., 34, 253–264.
Horlein, A.J., Naar, A.M., Heinzel, T., Torchia, J., Gloss, B., Kurokawa, R.,
Ryan, A., Kamei, Y., Soderstrom, M. & Glass, C.K. (1995) Ligand-
independent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor mediated by a
nuclear receptor co-repressor. Nature, 377, 397–404.
Howdeshell,K.L. (2002)Amodel of the development of thebrain as a construct of
the thyroid system. Environ. Health Perspect., 110(Suppl. 3), 337–348.
Hutson, L.D. & Bothwell, M. (2001) Expression and function of Xenopus
laevis p75(NTR) suggest evolution of developmental regulatory mecha-
nisms. J. Neurobiol., 49, 79–98.
Jacobs, A.J., Swain, G.P., Snedeker, J.A., Pijak, D.S., Gladstone, L.J. & Selzer,
M.E. (1997) Recovery of neurofilament expression selectively in regener-
ating reticulospinal neurons. J. Neurosci., 17, 5206–5220.
Jacobson, R.D., Virag, I. & Skene, J.H. (1986) A protein associated with axon
growth, GAP-43, is widely distributed and developmentally regulated in rat
CNS. J. Neurosci., 6, 1843–1855.
Johnson, K.G., McKinnell, I.W., Stoker, A.W. & Holt, C.E. (2001) Receptor
protein tyrosine phosphatases regulate retinal ganglion cell axon outgrowth
in the developing Xenopus visual system. J. Neurobiol., 49, 99–117.
Knerlich-Lukoschus, F., Juraschek, M., Blomer, U., Lucius, R., Mehdorn, H.M.
& Held-Feindt, J. (2008) Force-dependent development of neuropathic
central pain and time-related CCL2 ⁄ CCR2 expression after graded spinal
cord contusion injuries of the rat. J. Neurotrauma, 25, 427–448.
Kollros, J.J. (1981) Transitions in the nervous system during amphibian
metamorphosis. In Gilbert, L.I. & Frieden, E. (Eds), Metamorphosis: A
Problem in Developmental Biology. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 445–459.
Lancaster, C.A., Taylor-Harris, P.M., Self, A.J., Brill, S., van Erp, H.E. & Hall,
A. (1994) Characterization of rhoGAP. A GTPase-activating protein for rho-
related small GTPases. J. Biol. Chem., 269, 1137–1142.
Leloup, J. & Buscaglia, M. (1977) La triiodothyronine, hormone de la
metamorphose des Amphibiens. C. R. Acad. Sci, 284, 2261–2263.
Lin, W. & Szaro, B.G. (1994) Maturation of neurites in mixed cultures of spinal
cord neurons and muscle cells from Xenopus laevis embryos followed with
antibodies to neurofilament proteins. J. Neurobiol., 25, 1235–1248.
Livak, K.J. & Schmittgen, T.D. (2001) Analysis of relative gene expression
data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2)DDCT method. Methods, 25,
402–408.
Marsh-Armstrong, N., Cai, L. & Brown, D.D. (2004) Thyroid hormone controls
the development of connections between the spinal cord and limbs during
Xenopus laevis metamorphosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 165–170.
Mazella, J., Zsurger, N., Navarro, V., Chabry, J., Kaghad, M., Caput, D.,
Ferrara, P., Vita, N., Gully, D., Maffrand, J.P. & Vincent, J.P. (1998) The
100-kDa neurotensin receptor is gp95 ⁄ sortilin, a non-G-protein-coupled
receptor. J. Biol. Chem., 273, 26273–26276.
Michel, M.E. & Reier, P.J. (1979) Axonal-ependymal associations during early
regeneration of the transected spinal cord in Xenopus laevis tadpoles.
J. Neurocytol., 8, 529–548.
24 K. M. Gibbs et al.
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
van Mier, P. & Ten Donkelaar, H.J. (1984) Early development of descending
pathways from the brain stem to the spinal cord in Xenopus laevis. Anat.
Embryol. (Berl.), 170, 295–306.
van Mier, P., Joosten, H.W., van Rheden, R. & Ten Donkelaar, H.J. (1986) The
development of serotonergic raphespinal projections in Xenopus laevis. Int.
J. Dev. Neurosci., 4, 465–475.
Milstein, C., Wright, B. & Cuello, A.C. (1983) The discrepancy between the
cross-reactivity of a monoclonal antibody to serotonin and its immunohis-
tochemical specificity. Mol. Immunol., 20, 113–123.
Muchow, M., Bossis, I. & Porter, T.E. (2005) Ontogeny of pituitary throtrophs
and regulation by endogenous thryoid hormone feedback in the chick
embryo. J. Endocrinol., 184, 407–416.
Nakanishi, H. (2003) Microglial functions and proteases. Mol. Neurobiol., 27,
163–176.
Nieuwkoop, P.D. & Faber, J. (1994) Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin).
Garland, New York.
Norris, C.R. & Kalil, K. (1991) Guidance of callosal axons by radial glia in the
developing cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci., 11, 3481–3492.
Nykjaer, A., Lee, R., Teng, K.K., Jansen, P., Madsen, P., Nielsen, M.S.,
Jacobsen, C., Kliemannel, M., Schwarz, E., Willnow, T.E., Hempstead, B.L.
& Petersen, C.M. (2004) Sortilin is essential for proNGF-induced neuronal
cell death. Nature, 427, 843–848.
Paulsen, S.J., Larsen, L.K., Jelsing, J., Janssen, U., Gerstmayer, B. & Vrang, N.
(2009) Gene expression profiling of individual hypothalamic nuclei from
single animals using laser capture microdissection and microarrays.
J. Neurosci. Methods, 177, 87–93.
Piessevaux, J., Lavens, D., Montoye, T., Wauman, J., Catteeuw, D.,
Vandekerckhove, J., Belsham, D., Peelman, F. & Tavernier, J. (2006)
Functional cross-modulation between SOCS proteins can stimulate cytokine
signaling. J. Biol. Chem., 281, 32953–32966.
Raymond, P.A., Barthel, L.K., Bernardos, R.L. & Perkowski, J.J. (2006)
Molecular characterization of retinal stem cells and their niches in adult
zebrafish. BMC Dev. Biol., 6, 36.
Rehermann, M.I., Marichal, N., Russo, R.E. & Trujillo-Cenoz, O. (2009)
Neural reconnection in the transected spinal cord of the freshwater turtle
Trachemys dorbignyi. J. Comp. Neurol., 515, 197–214.
Sachs, L. (1984) Applied Statistics: A Handbook of Techniques. Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Saunders, N.R., Balkwill, P., Knott, G., Habgood, M.D., Mollgard, K.,
Treherne, J.M. & Nicholls, J.G. (1992) Growth of axons through a lesion in
the intact CNS of fetal rat maintained in long-term culture. Proc. Biol. Sci.,
250, 171–180.
Shaw, G. (1992) A neurofilament-specific sequence motif. Trends Biochem.
Sci., 17, 3405.
Shi, Y.B. (2000) Amphibian Metamorphosis: From Morphology to Molecular
Biology. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Shi, Y.B. (2009) Dual functions of thyroid hormone receptors in vertebrate
development: the roles of histone-modifying cofactor complexes. Thyroid,
19, 987–999.
Shi, Y.B. & Brown, D.D. (1993) The earliest changes in gene expression in
tadpole intestine induced by thyroid hormone. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 20312–
20317.
Simon, R., Tietge, J.E., Michalke, B., Degitz, S. & Schramm, K.W. (2002) Iodine
species and the endocrine system: thyroid hormone levels in adultDanio rerio
and developing Xenopus laevis. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 372, 481–485.
Sims, R.T. (1962) Transection of the spinal cord in developing Xenopus laevis.
J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol., 10, 115–126.
Singer, M., Nordlander, R.H. & Egar, M. (1979) Axonal guidance during
embryogenesis and regeneration in the spinal cord of the newt: the
blueprint hypothesis of neuronal pathway patterning. J. Comp. Neurol.,
185, 1–21.
Skene, J.H., Jacobson, R.D., Snipes, G.J., McGuire, C.B., Norden, J.J. &
Freeman, J.A. (1986) A protein induced during nerve growth (GAP-
43) is a major component of growth-cone membranes. Science, 233, 783–
786.
St.Germain, D.L., Schwartzman, R.A., Croteau, W., Kanamori, A., Wang, Z.,
Brown, D.D. & Galton, V.A. (1994) A thyroid hormone-regulated gene in
Xenopus laevis encodes a type III iodothyronine 5-deiodinase. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 7767–7771.
Szaro, B.G. & Gainer, H. (1988) Immunocytochemical identification of non-
neuronal intermediate filament proteins in the developing Xenopus laevis
nervous system. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res., 43, 207–224.
Szaro, B.G., Lee, V.M. & Gainer, H. (1989) Spatial and temporal expression of
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms of neurofilament proteins in
the developing nervous system of Xenopus laevis. Brain Res. Dev. Brain
Res., 48, 87–103.
Takahashi, K., Yoshida, N., Murakami, N., Kawata, K., Ishizaki, H., Tanaka-
Okamoto, M., Miyoshi, J., Zinn, A.R., Shime, H. & Inoue, N. (2007)
Dynamic regulation of p53 subnuclear localization and senescence by
MORC3. Mol. Biol. Cell, 18, 1701–1709.
Takeda, A., Goris, R.C. & Funakoshi, K. (2007) Regeneration of descending
projections to the spinal motor neurons after spinal hemisection in the
goldfish. Brain Res., 1155, 17–23.
Tata, J.R. (2006) Amphibian metamorphosis as a model for the developmental
actions of thyroid hormone. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 246, 10–20.
Taylor, J.S.H., Jack, J.L. & Easter, S.S. Jr (1989) Is the capacity for optic nerve
regeneration related to continued retinal ganglion cell production in the frog?
A test of the hypothesis that neurogenesis and axon regeneration are
obligatorily linked. Eur. J. Neurosci., 1, 626–638.
Ten Donkelaar, H.J. (2000) Development and regenerative capacity of
descending supraspinal pathways in tetrapods: a comparative approach.
Adv. Anat. Embryol. Cell Biol., 154, 1–145.
Tompkins, R. (1977) Grafting analysis of the periodic albino mutant of
Xenopus laevis. Dev. Biol., 57, 460–464.
Undamatla, J. & Szaro, B.G. (2001) Differential expression and localization of
neuronal intermediate filament proteins within newly developing neurites in
dissociated cultures of Xenopus laevis embryonic spinal cord. Cell Motil.
Cytoskeleton, 49, 16–32.
Wang, Z. & Brown, D.D. (1993) Thyroid hormone-induced gene expres-
sion program for amphibian tail resorption. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 16270–
16278.
Weiss, P. & Rosetti, F. (1951) Growth responses of opposite sign among
different neuron types exposed to thyroid hormone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 37, 540–546.
Wetzel, D.M., Lee, V.M. & Erulkar, S.D. (1989) Long-term cultures of neurons
from adult frog brain express GABA and glutamate-activated channels. J.
Neurobiol., 20, 255–270.
Will, U. (1986) Mauthner neurons survive metamorphosis in anurans: a
comparative HRP study on the cytoarchitecture of Mauthner neurons in
amphibians. J. Comp. Neurol., 244, 111–120.
Yoshida, K., Suzuki, Y., Yamamoto, K. & Sinohara, H. (1999) cDNA
sequencing of guinea pig alpha 2-HS glycoprotein, its expression in various
tissues and acute phase expression. Biol. Chem., 380, 95–99.
Zhang, L. & McClellan, A.D. (1999) Axonal regeneration of descending brain
neurons in larval lamprey demonstrated by retrograde double labeling. J.
Comp. Neurol., 410, 612–626.
Zhang, S., Xia, Y.Y., Lim, H.C., Tang, F.R. & Feng, Z.W. (2010) NCAM-
mediated locomotor recovery from spinal cord contusion injury involves
neuroprotection, axon regeneration, and synaptogenesis. Neurochem. Int.,
56, 919–929.
Zhao, Y. & Szaro, B.G. (1994) The return of phosphorylated and nonphosph-
orylated epitopes of neurofilament proteins to the regenerating optic nerve of
Xenopus laevis. J. Comp. Neurol., 343, 158–172.
Zottoli, S.J. & Freemer, M.M. (2006) Recovery of C-starts, equilibrium and
targeted feeding after whole spinal cord crush in the adult goldfish Carassius
auratus. J. Exp. Biol., 206, 3015–3029.
Metamorphosis and spinal cord axon regeneration 25
ª 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience ª 2010 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 9–25
