©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
Cell Cycle 10:5, 830-839; March 1, 2011; © 2011 Landes Bioscience
 RepoRt
830 Cell Cycle Volume 10 Issue 5
*Correspondence to: Robert M. Hoffman; E-mail: all@anticancer.com
Submitted: 12/28/10; Accepted: 01/28/11
DOI: 10.4161/cc.10.5.14969
Introduction
The hair follicle has recently been shown to be a source of nestin-
expressing pluripotent stem cells that can form neurons and other 
non-follicular cell types.1-7 These relatively small, oval-shaped 
cells express the stem cell marker nestin and are located in the 
bulge area (BA) surrounding the hair shaft and are interconnected 
by short dendrites. Nestin-expressing pluripotent stem cells were 
also found in the dermal papilla (DP).5 The expression of nestin 
in both neural stem cells and the hair follicle BA cells suggested 
the ability of nestin-expressing stem cells in the hair follicle to be 
able to differentiate to neurons and related cell types.1
Subsequently, bulge explants from adult mouse whisker fol-
licles were shown to give rise to cells which formed neurons, 
smooth muscle cells, Schwann cells, and melanocytes,2-4 thereby 
confirming the observation of Li et al.1
Transgenic mice, with GFP expression driven by the nes-
tin regulatory element [nestin-driven GFP (ND-GFP)], were 
Nestin has been shown to be expressed in the hair follicle, both in the bulge area (BA) as well as the dermal papilla (Dp). 
Nestin-expressing stem cells of both the BA and Dp have been previously shown to be pluripotent and be able to form 
neurons and other non-follicle cell types. the nestin-expressing pluripotent stem cells from the Dp have been termed 
skin precursor or SKp cells. the objective of the present study was to determine the major source of nestin-expressing 
pluripotent stem cells in the hair follicle and to compare the ability of the nestin-expressing pluripotent stem cells from 
the BA and Dp to repair spinal cord injury. transgenic mice in which the nestin promoter drives GFp (ND-GFp) were 
used in order to observe nestin expression in the BA and Dp. Nestin-expressing Dp cells were found in early and middle 
anagen. the BA had nestin expression throughout the hair cycle and to a greater extent than the Dp. the cells from both 
regions had very long processes extending from them as shown by two-photon confocal microscopy. Nestin-expressing 
stem cells from both areas differentiated into neuronal cells at high frequency in vitro. Both nestin-expressing Dp and 
BA cells differentiated into neuronal and glial cells after transplantation to the injured spinal cord and enhanced injury 
repair and locomotor recovery within four weeks. Nestin-expressing pluripotent stem cells from both the BA and Dp have 
potential for spinal cord regeneration, with the BA being the greater and more constant source.
The bulge area is the major  
hair follicle source of nestin-expressing 
pluripotent stem cells which can repair the spinal  
cord compared to the dermal papilla
Fang Liu,1,2,3 Aisada Uchugonova,1,2,4 Hiroaki Kimura,1,2,5 Chuansen Zhang,3 Ming Zhao,1 Lei Zhang,1,2 Karsten Koenig,4  
Jennifer Duong,1 Ryoichi Aki,1,6 Norimitsu Saito,1,6 Sumiyuki Mii,1,6 Yasuyuki Amoh,6 Kensei Katsuoka6  
and Robert M. Hoffman1,2,*
1AntiCancer Inc.; San Diego, CA USA;2Department of Surgery; University of Californiaat San Diego; San Diego, CA USA; 3Department of Anatomy; Second Military Medical 
University; Shanghai, China; 4Department of Biophotonics and Laser technology; Saarland University; Saarbruecken, Germany; 5Department of orthopaedic Surgery,  
Kanazawa University; Kanazawa, Japan; 6Department of Dermatology; School of Medicine, Kitasato University; Kanagawa, Japan
Key words: hair follicle, vibrissa, mouse, nestin, GFP, bulge area, dermal papilla, spinal cord injury, repair,  
confocal fluorescence imaging
used to identify nestin-expressing cells in the hair follicle bulge 
area (BA).1 The nestin-expressing BA cells were found to be posi-
tive for the stem cell marker CD34, as well as keratin 15-negative, 
suggesting their relatively undifferentiated state. Furthermore, 
BA nestin-expressing cells were shown to differentiate into neu-
rons, glia, keratinocytes, smooth muscle cells, and melanocytes 
in vitro.4 
When nestin-expressing cells from the mouse vibrissa BA 
were implanted into the gap region of the severed sciatic nerve, 
they greatly enhanced the rate of nerve regeneration and the 
restoration of nerve function. The transplanted follicle BA cells 
transdifferentiated largely into Schwann cells, which are known 
to support neuron regrowth. The transplanted mice recovered 
the ability to walk normally.8
Nestin-expressing mouse vibrissa BA cells were also trans-
planted to the injury site of C57B16 mice in which the thoracic 
spinal cord was severed. Most of the transplanted cells also dif-
ferentiated into Schwann cells that apparently facilitated repair 
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 831
 RepoRt RepoRt
of the severed spinal cord. The rejoined spinal cord recovered 
reestablished extensive hind-limb locomotor performance.9 
Yu et al.10,11 isolated a population of human nestin-express-
ing hair follicle BA cells. These cells also expressed neural crest 
and neuron stem cell markers as well as the embryonic stem cell 
transcription factors Nanog and Oct4. The human BA cells 
proliferated as spheres, were capable of self-renewal, and dif-
ferentiated into multiple lineages including myogenic, mela-
nocytic, and neuronal cell lineages after in vitro clonal single 
cell culture. In addition, the human nestin-expressing BA cells 
differentiated into adipocyte, chondrocyte, and osteocyte 
lineages. The human BA cells shared a similar gene 
expression pattern with murine skin immature neural crest 
cells.10,11
Human nestin-expressing hair follicle cells from the BA were 
transplanted in the severed sciatic nerve of the mouse where they 
differentiated into glial fibrillary-acidic-protein (GFAP)-positive 
Schwann cells and promoted the recovery of pre-existing axons, 
leading to nerve regeneration. The regenerated nerve recovered 
function and, upon electrical stimulation, contracted the gastroc-
nemius muscle.12
Biernaskie et al.13 showed what they termed skin-derived pre-
cursors (SKPs), are present in the hair follicle DP. SKPs could be 
cultured from adult whisker follicle DPs.14-16 SKPs were shown 
to differentiate into mesodermal and peripheral neural prog-
eny including adipocytes, skeletogenic cell types, and Schwann 
cells.17 The DP of hair follicles were said to comprise the niche for 
SKPs. SKPs were also shown to effect spinal cord repair.13
The question is what is the major source of hair follicle nestin-
expressing pluripotent stem cells which can effect spinal cord 
repair—the BA or DP? In the present study, we show, in the 
mouse vibrissa follicle, that nestin-expressing pluripotent stem 
cells, residing in the BA and DP, can effect spinal cord injury 
repair, with the BA being the major source.
Results
Localization of nestin-expressing cells in the vibrissa BA and 
DP. In order to visualize the localization of nestin-expressing 
cells in the mouse hair follicle, the anagen vibrissa follicle from 
ND-GFP mice (8 weeks) was dissected. The follicle was covered 
by a rigid capsule. It had two blood–filling areas (Fig. 1A1). One 
was at the BA, the other was at the bulb area, which contained 
the DP. The BA and DP could be clearly visualized after the cap-
sule was removed (Fig. 1A2–A7). Very bright GFP fluorescence 
was found at the BA and DP using the OV100 Small Animal 
Imaging System (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1A3, A5 
and A7), indicating that nestin-expressing cells existed in these 
two regions.
Nestin expression in the BA and DP varies with follicle 
stage. To understand whether the expression of nestin in BA and 
DP was related to animal age or follicle stage, vibrissa follicles 
were dissected from 2-week and 9-month old ND-GFP mice. 
The BA in all the follicle stages expressed nestin very strongly 
in animals of both ages. In middle anagen follicles (Fig. 2B1–
B4, C1–C4, and Fig. 3B1 and B2), the area between the BA 
and DP was extended and nestin-expressing blood vessels were 
present. Some blood vessels were associated with the DP directly 
(Fig. 2C4). The DP had the most extensive nestin expression in 
middle anagen (Fig. 2, B1–B4, C1–C4). In late anagen follicles, 
the DP lost nestin expression (Fig. 2, D1–D4). Similar patterns 
were seen with 9-month old mice (data not shown). 
Nestin-expressing cells from BA and DP have very simi-
lar morphology. Confocal two-photon microscopy was used to 
visualize individual nestin-expressing cells in the DP and BA. 
The nestin-expressing oval-shaped cells with long dendrite-like 
structures were observed in both the BA and DP within isolated 
vibrissa follicles (Fig. 3A and B). The BA and DP oval-shaped 
cells with long dendrite-like structures were also observed from 
each region when the cells from each region were cultured on 
Gelfoam® (Fig. 3C and D). These cells from both the BA and 
DP were essentially identical in morphology. 
Nestin-expressing cells from both BA and DP can form 
spheres. Nestin-expressing cells from the BA and DP were cul-
tured in serum-free medium supplemented with bFGF and EGF 
(Fig. 1B and C). After primary culture for 4 to 7 days, nestin-
expressing cells grew out from the BA and DP. BA cells derived 
from whiskers from red fluorescent protein (RFP)-expressing mice 
were also cultured using the same medium as that for ND-GFP 
BA cells and DP cells (Fig. 1D). Immunocytochemistry dem-
onstrated that the RFP-BA cells also expressed nestin (Fig. 1E).
Cells from BA and DP floated in culture. At day 7, spheres 
were formed from cells from both regions (Fig. 4A1 and A2). 
Cells from both regions expressed nestin, identified by immuno-
cytochemistry (Fig. 4B1 and C1). Nestin-expressing cells from 
the BA had higher sphere-forming efficiency than those from the 
DP (Fig. 4A3). The spheres started to differentiate after bFGF 
and EGF were removed from the culture medium. Most cells 
were Tuj1- or GFAP- positive suggesting that nestin-expressing 
cells from both the BA and DP can differentiate into neuronal or 
Schwann cells (Fig. 4B2, B3, C2 and C3). Nestin-expressing DP 
cells were versican-negative (Fig. 4C4), which is a marker for DP 
cells. This result suggests that nestin-expressing DP cells may not 
be native to the DP. 
Three-dimensional culture of nestin-expressing BA and DP 
cells on Gelfoam®. Nestin-expressing cells from both the BA 
and DP grew very well on Gelfoam®. The cells attached to the 
Gelfoam® within one hour. They grew along the grids of the 
Gelfoam® during the first 2 or 3 days. Later they spread into the 
Gelfoam® (Figs. 3, 4D and 4E).
Fate of nestin-expressing BA and DP cells transplanted into 
the injured spinal cord. After transplantation of Gelfoam® cul-
tures of nestin-expressing BA or DP cells into the injured spinal 
cord (including the Gelfoam®) nestin-expressing BA and DP 
cells were observed to be viable over 100 days post surgery. The 
transplanted cells attached to the surrounding tissue very well. 
The surface of the transplanted area appeared smooth (Fig. 5A2 
and B1).
When RFP-BA cells plus Gelfoam® were transplanted 
into the spinal cord of GFP transgenic nude mice (Fig. 5A1–
A8), many RFP-BA cells were found in the transplanted area 
(Fig. 5A3–A7). RFP-BA cells were observed migrating toward 
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
832 Cell Cycle Volume 10 Issue 5
adjacent spinal cord segments (Fig. 5A7). GFP host cells and 
fibers also grew into the injured area (Fig. 5A5–A7). H&E stain-
ing showed connections between the transplanted cells and the 
host tissue (Fig. 5A8).
When ND-GFP DP-Gelfoam® cultures were transplanted 
into the injured spinal cord (Fig. 5B1–B8), the transplanted cells 
grew very well and also migrated toward adjacent spinal cord seg-
ments (Fig. 5B2, B3 and B7). Some cells had long extensions 
(Fig. 5B4 and B5). 
Immunohistochemistry showed many Tuj1-, Isl 1/2, and 
EN1- positive cells and nerve fibers in the transplanted area of 
the spinal cord after BA-Gelfoam® or DP-Gelfoam® cultures 
were transplanted (Fig. 6A1–A3 and B1–B3). Fewer Tuj1-, Isl 
1/2-, and EN 1- positive cells or nerve fibers were observed in the 
Gelfoam®-only transplant group (Fig. 6C1–C3). Some 
cells in the transplanted area were also GFAP - positive (Fig. 6A4, 
B4 and C4) in the above three groups. The average grey value of 
the stained fluorescence showed that the BA Gelfoam® transplant 
group had significantly higher Tuj1-, and EN-1-positive fluores-
cence grey value than the DP-Gelfoam® group or Gelfoam®-
only group. The Gelfoam®-only group had significantly lower 
Tuj1-, Isl 1/2, and EN-1-positive fluorescence grey value than the 
BA-Gelfoam® and DP-Gelfoam® group (Fig. 6D).
In the non-transplanted group (Fig. 5C1), Tuj1-
immunofluorescence staining was negative at the injured area 
(Fig. 5C2). Many GFAP-positive cells aggregated together and 
formed a “wall” at the injured site (Fig. 5C2). In the untrans-
planted group, glia cells formed a barrier at the spinal cord injured 
Figure 1. Nestin-expressing cells in the bulge area (BA) and dermal papilla (Dp) of mouse vibrissal follicle. A1–A3: Whole view of a ND-GFp follicle. the 
follicle capsule was intact in (A1). In (A2 and A3), the capsule was removed. the BA and Dp had strong nestin-GFp fluorescence. A4–A7 are the higher 
magnification of (A2 and A3). the Dp is shown by arrows. (B) primary culture of ND-GFp BA cells. (C) primary culture of ND-GFp Dp cells. two ND-GFp 
dermal papilla are shown. (D) primary culture of RFp BA cells. (e) Nestin-immunofluorescence staining of RFp BA cells. the BA cells were nestin-positive. 
panel A1–A7 were observed with the olympus oV100 Small-Animal Imaging System. panel B–e were observed under fluorescence microscopy. Scale 
bar in A1: 500 μm; Scale bars in A2 and A3: 200 μm; Scale bars in A4–A7: 100 μm; Scale bars in B, D, e: 25 μm; Scale bar in C: 50 μm.
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 833
site. It prevented the regeneration of 
nerve fibers. The Gelfoam®-only group 
induced less neuronal marker-positive 
cells in the injured site than that of the 
BA-Gelfoam® or DP-Gelfoam® trans-
plant groups.
Spinal cord recovery after transplan-
tation of nestin-expressing BA or DP 
cells. All the animals had paralysis of 
the hindlimb at the same side where the 
spinal cord was injured. Most animals in 
the BA-Gelfoam® and DP-Gelfoam® 
transplant groups recovered plantar 
placing of the paw and frequent dor-
sal stepping within 3 days after trans-
plantation. It took the Gelfoam®-only 
group 7 days to recover this behavior. 
It took the untransplanted group 14 
days for locomotion recovery. Twenty-
eight days after transplantation, both 
the BA-Gelfoam® and DP-Gelfoam® 
groups had normal locomotion. Animals 
walked with consistent plantar stepping, 
mostly coordinated, and paws in paral-
lel at initial contact and liftoff. Though 
animals in the Gelfoam®-only group 
also had consistent plantar stepping at 
day 28, they only had some coordination 
or the paws rotated at initial contact and 
liftoff. The untransplanted group had 
the least locomotion recovery. At day 
28, only a few Gelfoam®-only animals 
walked with occasional plantar stepping. 
After 21 days, the BBB locomotor recov-
ery scores18 of the BA-Gelfoam® and 
the DP-Gelfoam® transplant animals 
were similar (Fig. 7). Those two groups 
achieved significantly greater locomotor 
recovery than groups transplanted with 
Gelfoam®-only and untransplanted ani-
mals from 21 days to 63 days post sur-
gery. The data suggest that transplanted 
nestin-expressing pluripotent stem cells 
from both the BA and DP have similar 
effects on locomotor recovery, which 
are better than that of Gelfoam®-only 
transplantation. 
Discussion
Nestin-expressing pluripotent stem 
cells were found in the BA and DP of 
the mouse whisker follicle. Nestin-
expressing BA cells and DP cells co-
existed in the mouse vibrissal follicle 
only during part of the hair follicle cycle, 
Figure 2. Vibrissa follicles from a 2-week-old nestin-GFp mouse. the capsule of the follicles was 
removed. the BA in all the follicles expressed nestin very strongly. panel (A1–A4) show follicles in 
early anagen. the area between the BA and Dp was small and the blood vessels in this area were 
not yet formed. panel (B1–B4) and (C1–C4) show follicles in middle anagen. the area between the 
BA and Dp was extended and blood vessels were formed. Some blood vessels connected to the Dp 
directly (C4). the Dp had strong nestin expression. panel (D1–D4) shows a follicle in late anagen. 
the Dp lost nestin-GFp fluorescence. All imaging was with the olympus oV100. Arrows point to the 
Dp. panel (A4, B4, C4 and D4) are the higher magnification of dotted squares in (A2, B2, C2 and D2), 
respectively. Scale bars in (A1–A3 and B1–B3): 200; Scale bars in (C1–C3 and D1–D3): 500 μm; Scale 
bars in (A4, B4, C4 and D4): 100 μm.
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
834 Cell Cycle Volume 10 Issue 5
including middle anagen. Nestin-expressing cells were 
present in the DP only in the early and middle anagen 
stage, independent of age.
From the early to the late anagen stages, the BA 
became smaller and the area between the DP and BA 
became larger. In late anagen, nestin expression in 
the DP became weaker and disappeared. There were 
many nestin-expressing blood vessels between the BA 
and DP that connected those two structures. They 
started to be formed in the early anagen and formed a 
blood vessel network in middle anagen. Regression of 
blood vessels occurred in late anagen. It seemed that 
nestin expression in the DP coincided with the exis-
tence of nestin-expressing blood vessels, which may 
originate from the BA. 
Skin-derived precursor cells (SKPs) were shown to 
be multipotent neural crest-related stem cells that grow 
as self-renewing spheres and are capable of generat-
ing neurons and myelinating glial cells. Hunt et al.15 
demonstrated that the DP of the rodent vibrissal fol-
licle is 1,000-fold enriched for sphere-forming neural 
crest-derived cells compared with whole facial skin. 
Biernaskie et al.13 used SKPs to repair the contused rat 
spinal cord. SKPs reduced the size of the contusion cav-
ity, myelinated endogenous host axons and recruited 
endogenous Schwann cells into the injured cord.
Cells from the BA of the mouse and human express 
nestin and can differentiate into many cell types, inclu-
ding neurons and glial cells1,2,4,8,10 and effect nerve8,9 
and spinal cord repair in mouse models. Yu et al.10,11 
demonstrated that stem cells with neural crest charac-
teristics from the BA of cultured human hair follicles 
can form spheroid structures. SKP cells can also dif-
ferentiate to neurons and glial cells.14, 15 In the present 
study, nestin-expressing cells from the BA had higher 
sphere-forming efficiency than those from the DP.
The present study showed that transplanted 
nestin-expressing BA and DP cells in the injured 
spinal cord both expressed Tuj1, and the motorneuron markers 
Isl 1/2 and EN1 as well. In the transplanted area of the spine, 
some GFAP-positive cells were observed in both groups. Nestin-
expressing BA cells and DP cells differentiated into neuronal 
cells which appeared to accelerate spinal cord injury repair. The 
BA-Gelfoam® and DP-Gelfoam® transplant groups had simi-
lar BMS scores suggesting that nestin-expressing pluripotent 
stem cells from both regions have similar effects on locomotor 
recovery and both cell types are candidates for use for spinal cord 
repair. The greater and more constant expression of nestin in the 
BA and than the DP suggest the BA may be the major source of 
pluripotent stem cells.
Materials and Methods
Animals. Nestin-driven GFP (ND-GFP) transgenic mice,1,19 at 
different ages, were used to observe the expression of nestin in 
the BA and DP, and also for the culture of the nestin-expressing 
cells. RFP transgenic mice20 were also used as a source of RFP 
BA cells. GFP transgenic nude mice21 were used as hosts for 
transplantation of RFP-BA cells into the injured spinal cord. 
Non-transgenic nude mice were also used for spinal cord trans-
plantation experiments.
Isolation and culture of nestin-expressing cells from the 
bulge area (BA) and dermal papilla (DP) of mouse vibrissa 
follicles. The whisker pad of the nestin-GFP or RFP transgenic 
mice was cut free and its inner surface was exposed. The vibrissa 
follicles were dissected under a binocular microscope. Small scis-
sors were used to separate each follicle. Anagen follicles were cho-
sen for cell culture. The isolated vibrissae were washed in PBS 
three times. Fine needles were used to remove the follicle cap-
sule. The BA and DP areas were separated with fine needles. All 
surgical procedures were performed under a sterile environment. 
A 12-well plate coated with Collagen I was pre-incubated with 
DMEM-F12 (GIBCO/BRL), containing B-27 (GIBCO/BRL), 
N2 (GIBCO/BRL) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (GIBCO/
Figure 3. (A and B) Isolated vibrissa of an ND-GFp mouse was imaged by optical 
sectioning in 3D using a confocal two-photon microscope (Fluoview FV1000, olym-
pus; tokyo Japan) with a high NA objective (40x/NA1.3 oil). the figures demonstrate 
one optical plane image out of 3D stacks of images. BA (A) and Dp (B) are in middle 
anagen. ND-GFp expressing cells in the BA and Dp have similar morphology (oval/
round shaped body with a diameter of approximately 5–7 µm) with long dendrite-
like structures. Arrows depict typical cells in each region. the blue fluorescence 
is from Hoechst staining and green fluorescence is from GFp. (C and D) ND-GFp 
expressing hair follicle stem cells grew out from the BA (C) and Dp (D) when cultured 
on Gelfoam® after several days of incubation. In both images, nestin-expressing cells 
from both areas have similar oval/round morphology (diameter of 5–7 µm) with long 
dendrite-like structures. Arrows depict typical cells from each region.
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 835
Figure 4. Sphere-forming of cells from the BA and Dp. (A1) Spheres formed from RFp BA cells. (A2) Spheres formed from ND-GFp Dp cells. (A3) Cells 
from the BA had higher sphere-forming efficiency than those from the Dp. Immunofluorescence-staining showed spheres were nestin-positive (B1: BA 
sphere; C1: Dp sphere). tuj1- or GFAp-positive cells were detected in the spheres after bFGF and eGF were removed from the culture medium (B2–B3, 
cells from a BA sphere; C2–C3, cells from a Dp sphere). (C4) showed versican-negative staining of ND-GFp Dp cells. Green fluorescence: FItC, Red fluo-
rescence: tRItC, Blue fluorescence: DApI. Scales in (A1) and (A2): 50 μm; Scales in (B1–B3, C1–C4): 20 μm. (D) RFp BA cells grown on Gelfoam® for 10 days. 
(e) ND-GFp Dp cells grown on Gelfoam® for 10 days. Scale bar: 50 μm.
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
836 Cell Cycle Volume 10 Issue 5
Figure 5. Appearance of RFp BA cells or ND-GFp Dp cells plus Gelfoam® transplanted to the injured spinal cord. (A1–A8): RFp BA cells grown on Gel-
foam® were transplanted into the injured spinal cord of GFp mice. (A1) is day 0 after surgery, (A2–A7) is 5 weeks post surgery. In panel (A3–A7), many 
RFp BA cells were found in the transplanted area. GFp host cells and fibers grew into the injured area (A5–A7). In panel (A7), RFp BA cells are observed 
migrating toward spinal cord segments. panel (A8) is H&e staining of a transplanted area 7 weeks post-surgery. Many cells and fibers were found at 
the injured site. (B1–B8): ND-GFp Dp Gelfoam® was transplanted into the injured spinal cord, 8 weeks post-surgery. transplanted cells grew very well 
and also migrated toward spinal cord segments (B2, B3 and B7). Some cells had long extensions (B4 and B5). panel (B4) is the higher magnification of 
panel (B3). panel (B5) is the higher magnification of the dotted square in panel (B4). H&e staining in panel (B8) also showed cells and fibers migrating 
into the injured site. Arrows in panel (A1, A2, A4, B1 and B3) showed the injured and transplanted area of the spinal cord. panel (A1–A4 and B1–B3) 
were observed with the olympus oV100. panel (A5–A7 and B4–B7) were observed with the olympus IV100 Laser Scanning Microscope. Scale bar in 
(A1): 100 μm; Scale bars in (A2 and A3): 500 μm; Scale bar in (A4): 200 μm; Scale bars in (A5, A8, B5, and B8): 20 μm; Scale bars in (A6, A7, B4, B6 and B7): 
50 μm; Scale bars in (B1–B3): 1 mm. (C) Spinal cord injured on the right side without transplantation, 7 weeks post surgery. In the injured area, many 
GFAp-positive cells aggregated forming a “wall.” tuj1-immunofluorescence staining was negative at the injured area. Dotted lines in panels C2 and 
C3 represent the injured area. Red fluorescence: tRItC, Blue fluorescence: DApI. Scale bar in (A): 1 mm; Scale bar in (B), 20 µm. panel (C1) shows the in-
jured site of the spinal cord on the right side (arrow). It was observed with the oV100. panel (C2) and panel (C3) show the immunofluorescent staining 
of the frozen sections of the injured spinal cord with tuj1- and GFAp- primary antibodies, observed under fluorescence microscopy. the injured area 
is shown by the dotted lines. It was negative for tuj1-immunofluorescence staining at the injured area. Many GFAp-positive cells (red fluorescence) 
aggregated toward the injury area to form a “glial wall.” Red fluorescence was stained by tRItC-conjugated secondary antibody; Blue fluorescence 
was the nuclear counterstaining by DApI. Scale bar in (C1): 1 mm; Scale bars in (C2 and C3): 20 μm
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 837
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
838 Cell Cycle Volume 10 Issue 5
BRL). The separated BA and DP attached 
to the plate bottom within 40 minutes. 
Five to eight BA or DP were placed in each 
well. Serum-free culture medium was then 
added very carefully into the well with a 
1 ml pipette. Half the medium was changed 
every other day. 20 ng/ml bFGF and EGF 
each were added daily. After 4 to 6 days, 
the attached BA or DP were removed from 
the plate bottom. The cells were incubated 
with 0.25% trypsin for 10 minutes at 37°. 
Fetal bovine serum was added to inhibit 
typsin. Cells were washed with serum-free 
culture medium and were seeded in a col-
lagen I-coated T25 flask.
High-resolution imaging of BA and 
DP nestin-expressing cells with a confocal 
two-photon microscope. A confocal two-
photon microscope (Fluoview FV1000, 
Olympus Corp., Tokyo Japan) was used 
for two- (x,y) and three-dimensional (3D, 
x,y,z) high-resolution imaging of vibrissa 
follicles from ND-GFP transgenic mice. 
Excitation sources included cw semicon-
ductor lasers at 473 nm for GFP excita-
tion and 405 nm for Hoechst excitation. 
A tunable Mai-Tai HP1040 laser emit-
ting at 700-1020 nm (Newport-Spectra 
Physics, Irvine, CA) was used for deep 
multicolor imaging including two-photon 
induced autofluorescence. Fluorescence 
images were obtained using the 20x/0.50 
UPLAN FLN and 40x/1.3 oil Olympus 
UPLAN FLN objectives. Emission fil-
ters used were BA 430-455 nm (at 
exc. 405 nm, Hoechst) and BA 490-590 (at exc. 473 nm, 
GFP).
Sphere-forming assay. BA and DP cells, at passage two, were 
seeded at a density of 30,000 cells per ml in 10 ml of serum-free 
culture medium in a 25 cm2 tissue culture flask with low attach-
ment. Sphere numbers were determined at day seven by counting 
under a low-power fluorescence microscope.
Three-dimensional culture of cells on Gelfoam®. BA and 
DP cells passage 2 or 3 were collected and centrifuged for 5 
minutes. The cell density was 1×107 cells/ml. Sterile Gelfoam® 
(Pharmacia & Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, MI) sponges com-
prised of absorbable gelatin prepared from purified porcine skin, 
were trimmed into 3 mm3 cubes. Cell suspensions (20 µl) were 
injected into each sponge cube with a 31G insulin syringe. The 
Figure 6 (See previous page). Immunofluorescence staining of the transplanted area of the spinal cord. primary antibodies used were tuj1, Isl 1/2, 
eN1, and GFAp. Secondary antibodies were conjugated with FItC (green fluorescence) or tRItC (red fluorescence). Nuclei were counterstained by  
DApI (blue fluorescence). positive staining in the sections from the BA Gelfoam® transplanted group appear green. positive staining in the sections 
of the other two groups is red. In the BA or Dp plus Gelfoam® transplant groups, many tuj1-, Isl 1/2-, and eN 1- positive cells or nerve fibers (arrows) 
were found in the transplanted area (panel A1–A3, B1–B3). the Gelfoam® transplant group induced fewer neuronal marker-positive cells in the injured 
area than that of the BA cells + Gelfoam® or Dp cells + Gelfoam® transplant groups. However, the Gelfoam®-only group had more GFAp- positive cells 
than that in the BA- or Dp- Gelfoam® groups. Scale bar: 20 μm. Glial cells could form a barrier in the spinal cord injured area. the barrier prevented the 
regeneration of nerve fibers. In the Gelfoam®-only group, some neuronal-like cells appeared in the transplanted area (C1, C3). those cells may come 
from the surrounding spinal cord tissue. More neuronal-like cells or nerve fibers appeared in the BA- or Dp-Gelfoam® groups, which stimulated the 
recovery of spinal cord injury much more than Gelfoam® only. the neuronal-like cells in these two groups could come from the implanted BA cells 
or Dp cells or migrate from the surrounding tissue. (D) Average grey value of the stained fluorescence in the transplanted area of the spinal cord. the 
BA-Gelfoam® group had significantly higher tuj1-, and eN-1-positive fluorescence grey values than the Dp-Gelfoam® group and Gelfoam®-only group. 
the Gelfoam®-only group had significantly lower tuj1-, Isl 1/2-, and eN-1-positive fluorescence grey values than that in the BA-Gelfoam® and Dp-
Gelfoam® groups, except for the GFAp-positive fluorescence grey value. *, BA-Gelfoam® group vs Dp-Gelfoam® group, p<0.05; &, BA-Gelfoam® group vs 
Gelfoam®-only group, p<0.05; &&, p<0.01; ##, Dp cells + Gelfoam® group vs Gelfoam®-only group, p<0.01.
Figure 7. Mean Basso mouse scale (BMS) for locomotion (BMS) scores. the locomotor recovery 
pattern of the BA - Gelfoam® and the Dp - Gelfoam® animals was similar. these two groups 
achieved significantly greater locomotor recovery than the Gelfoam®-only and non-transplanted 
control animals.
©2011 Landes Bioscience.
Do not distribute.
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 839
Gelfoam® cubes, together with the injected cells, were put in 
48-well plates and placed in an incubator (37°C, 5% CO
2
, 95% 
humidity) for one hour before 1 ml culture medium was added 
in each well. Half of the medium was changed every other day. 
After ten days, the cultures, including the Gelfoam® were used 
for spinal cord transplantation.
Surgical procedure, spinal cord injury and transplantation 
of Gelfoam®-cultured BA and DP cells. Six to eight-week-old 
non-transgenic nude mice and transgenic GFP nude mice were 
used. Animals were anesthetized with tribromoethanol. The 
skin overlaying the vertebral column was cut and a pair of fine 
scissors was used to separate the muscles along the spine. A par-
tial laminectomy was performed at T8. A 31G insulin syringe 
needle was used to cut the right side of the spinal cord. The 
lesion surface size was 500 µm × 300 µm. The depth of the 
lesion was from the dorsal to the abdominal surface of the spinal 
cord. Gelfoam® cultures (including the Gelfoam®) were intro-
duced into the lesion site with fine forceps within 30 minutes of 
injury. The animals were divided into four groups, 10 nude mice 
in each group: (1) mice transplanted in the injured spine with 
BA cells on Gelfoam®; (2) mice transplanted in the injured 
spine with DP cells on Gelfoam®; (3) mice transplanted in the 
injured spine with Gelfoam® only; (4) negative control mice 
with no transplantation. Spinal cord samples from the injured 
and transplanted area were obtained at different time points, 
embedded in OCT, dipped in liquid nitrogen, and kept in a 
-80°C freezer. 
Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry. 
Cultured BA and DP cells or frozen sections from the spinal 
cord were fixed in pre-cooled 4% paraformaldehyde at RT for 
10 minutes and washed with PBS three times. Some frozen sec-
tions were processed for H&E staining. Cells and frozen sections 
were used for immunofluorescence staining. The main proce-
dures were as follows: (1) Slides treated with 0.3% Triton X-100 
were incubased at RT for 30 minutes; (2) 5% normal goat serum 
was applied at RT for 30 minutes; (3) Primary antibodies were 
applied at 4˚C for 48 hours. The primary antibodies used were 
nestin (rabbit, 1:100, Sigma); versican (mouse, 1:100, Millipore); 
Tuj1 (rabbit, 1:30, Sigma); GFAP (rabbit, 1:100, Sigma); Isl 1/2 
(rabbit, 1:100, Santa Cruz); EN-1 (rabbit, 1:100, Santa Cruz); 
(4) Secondary antibodies used were: goat anti-rabbit IgG FITC 
(Santa Cruz); donkey anti-rabbit IgG TRITC (Santa Cruz); 
donkey anti-mouse IgG TRITC (Santa Cruz); 1:100, RT, dark, 
2.5 hours. (5) DAPI, 1:1000, diluted in PBS, RT, 5 minutes. (6) 
Slides were mounted with Fluoromount (Sigma) and observed 
under fluorescence microscopy.
BMS measurement of locomotor recovery. According to the 
Basso mouse scale, all mice with spinal cord injury (SCI) were 
tested in an open field for 4 min pre-operatively and weekly for 
63 days post-operatively. At the first week post surgery, the mice 
were observed every day. Ankle movements, plantar placing, dor-
sal stepping, frequency of plantar stepping, stepping coordina-
tion and the position of the paws were carefully observed by two 
people.
Statistical analyses. Images of the immunostaining were 
processed for average grey value of fluorescence with the use of 
Paint Shop Pro 8 and Cell (Olympus) software. All data are pre-
sented as mean ± SEM. Group differences were determined using 
the unpaired t-test. The significance level for all tests was set at 
p < 0.05. 
References
1. Li L, Mignone J, Yang M, Matic M, Penman S, 
Enikolopov G, Hoffman RM. Nestin expression in hair 
follicle sheath progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2003; 100:9658-61.
2. Sieber-Blum M, Grim M, Hu YF, Szeder V. Pluripotent 
neural crest stem cells in the adult hair follicle. Dev 
Dyn 2004; 231:258-69.
3. Sieber-Blum M, Schnell L, Grim M, Hu YF, Schneider 
R, Schwab ME. Characterization of epidermal neural 
crest stem cell (EPI-NCSC) grafts in the lesioned spinal 
cord. Mol Cell Neurosci 2006; 32:67-81.
4. Amoh Y, Li L, Katsuoka K, Penman S, Hoffman RM. 
Multipotent nestin-positive, keratin-negative hair-folli-
cle-bulge stem cells can form neurons. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 2005; 102:5530-4. 
5. Biernaskie J, Paris M, Morozova O, Fagan BM, Marra 
M, Pevny L, Miller, F.D. SKPs derive from hair follicle 
precursors and exhibit properties of adult dermal stem 
cells. Cell Stem Cell 2009; 5:610-23.
6. Hoffman RM. The pluripotency of hair follicle stem 
cells. Cell Cycle 2006; 5:232-3.
7. Amoh Y, Kanoh M, Niiyama S, Kawahara K, Satoh Y, 
Katsuoka K, Hoffman RM. Human and mouse hair 
follicles contain both multipotent and monopotent 
stem cells. Cell Cycle 2009; 8:176-7.
8. Amoh Y, Li L, Campillo R, Kawahara K, Katsuoka K, 
Penman S, Hoffman RM. Implanted hair follicle stem 
cells form Schwann cells that support repair of severed 
peripheral nerves. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 
102:17734-8. 
9. Amoh Y, Li L, Katsuoka K, Hoffman RM. Multipotent 
hair follicle stem cells promote repair of spinal cord 
injury and recovery of walking function. Cell Cycle 
2008; 7:1865-9.
10. Yu H, Fang D, Kumar SM, Li L, Nguyen TK, Acs G, et 
al. Isolation of a novel population of multipotent adult 
stem cells from human hair follicles. Am J Pathol 2006; 
168:1879–88. 
11. Yu H, Kumar SM, Kossenkov AV, Showe L, Xu X. Stem 
cells with neural crest characteristics derived from the 
bulge region of cultured human hair follicles. J Invest 
Derm 2010; 130:1227–36. 
12. Amoh Y, Kanoh M, Niiyama S, Hamada Y, Kawahara 
K, Sato Y, et al. Human hair follicle pluripotent stem 
(hfPS) cells promote regeneration of peripheral-nerve 
injury: An advantageous alternative to ES and iPS cells. 
J Cell Biochem 2009; 107:1016-20.
13. Biernaskie J, Sparling JS, Liu J, Shannon CP, Plemel 
JR, Xie Y, et al. Skin-derived precursors generate 
myelinating Schwann cells that promote remyelination 
and functional recovery after contusion spinal cord 
injury. J Neurosci 2007; 27:9545-59.
14. Fernandes KJL, McKenzie IA, Mill P, Smith KM, 
Akhavan M, Barnabe-Heider F, et al. A dermal niche 
for mutipotent adult skin-derived precursor cells. Nat 
Cell Biol. 2004; 6:1082-93. 
15. Hunt DP, Morris PN, Sterling J, Anderson J, Joannides 
A, Jahoda C, et al. A highly enriched niche of precursor 
cells with neuronal and glial potential within the hair 
follicle dermal papilla of adult skin. Stem Cells 2008; 
26:163–72. 
16. Joannides A, Gaughwin P, Schwiening C, Majed H, 
Sterling J, Compston A, Chandran S. Efficient gen-
eration of neural precursors from adult human skin: 
Astrocytes promote neurogenesis from skin-derived 
stem cells. Lancet 2004; 364:172–8. 
17. McKenzie IA, Biernaskie J, Toma JG, Midha R, 
Miller FD. Skin-derived precursors generate myelinat-
ing Schwann cells for the injured and dysmyelinated 
nervous system. J Neurosci 2006; 26:6651–60.
18. Basso DM, Fisher LC, Anderson AJ, Jakeman LB, 
McTigue DM, Popvich PG. Basso Mouse Scale for 
locomotion detects differences in recovery after spi-
nal cord injury in five common mouse strains. J 
Neurotrauma 2006; 23:635-59.
19. Mignone JL, Kukekov V, Chiang AS, Steindler D, 
Enikolopov G. Neural stem and progenitor cells in 
nestin-GFP transgenic mice. J Comp Neurol 2004; 
469:311-24. 
20. Yang M, Reynoso J, Bouvet M, Hoffman RM. A trans-
genic red fluorescent protein-expressing nude mouse 
for color-coded imaging of the tumor microenviron-
ment. J Cell Biochem 2009; 106:279-84.
21. Yang M, Reynoso J, Jiang P, Li L, Moossa AR, Hoffman 
RM. Transgenic nude mouse with ubiquitous green 
fluorescent protein expression as a host for human 
tumors. Cancer Res 2004; 64:8651-6.
