Biomedical Research 32 (1) 1-7, 2011
Caffeic acid phenethyl ester reduces spinal cord injury-evoked locomotor 
dysfunction
Masaki Kasai, Hidefumi Fukumitsu, Hitomi Soumiya, and Shoei Furukawa
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Daigaku-nishi 1-25-4, Gifu 501-1196, Japan
(Received 7 October 2010; and accepted 24 October 2010)
ABSTRACT
Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) is a component of propolis, which is a substance taken from 
the hives of honeybees, and is known to exhibit an anti-inflammatory activity. Such activity has 
been thought to be partly based on its potential and specific inhibitory activities toward nuclear 
factor-κB, a transcription factor. Therefore, in the present study, we evaluated the effect of CAPE 
on functional locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury (SCI) caused by hemi-transection, be-
cause inflammatory responses are a major cause of the secondary injury observed following SCI 
and play a pivotal role in regulating the pathogenesis of acute and chronic SCI. When CAPE was 
i.p.-administered at a dosage of 10 μmol/kg, it enhanced the recovery of locomotor function and 
reduced the lesion size while suppressing the expression of the mRNAs for a pro-inflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-1β and the inflammatory enzymes, inducible nitric oxide synthase and cyclo-
oxygenase-2. These results suggest CAPE to be a promising therapeutic tool for reducing the 
secondary neuronal damage following primary physical injury to the spinal cord.
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) causes a perma-
nent and irreversible loss of motor function, which 
dramatically decreases the quality of life for patients 
with SCI. Nevertheless, no effective treatments have 
been established to date; therefore, therapeutic inter-
ventions for SCI are urgently needed.
　Primary physical damage to the spinal cord is fol-
lowed by delayed secondary neural degeneration 
that involves various cellular and biochemical events 
that lead to progressive tissue damage and cell death 
(6). In particular, inflammatory responses are a ma-
jor component of this secondary injury and play a 
pivotal role in regulating the pathogenesis of acute 
and chronic SCI (4, 7). The nuclear factor (NF)-κB 
transcription factor is a key mediator in inflamma-
tory responses and has been implicated in the pro-
gression of this secondary injury. NF-κB can be 
activated by a variety of stimuli, including inflam-
matory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1, which 
is released from spinal cord-resident cells and/or 
infiltrating monocytes (4, 25). In response to SCI, 
NF-κB induces the transcriptional activation of pro-
inflammatory genes including inducible nitric oxide 
(NO) synthase (iNOS), which produces NO, and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) (23). Both iNOS and 
COX-2 cause cellular damage by producing nitrogen 
radical species and oxygen radicals, respectively, 
which are potent mediators of cell death in the SCI 
(28, 31). Therefore, they are closely involved in the 
formation of the secondary injury.
　Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) is a compo-
nent of propolis, which is a substance taken from the 
hives of honeybees; and it exhibits many biological 
and pharmacological activities including anti-oxida-
tive, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, and anti-viral 
ones (2). These activities may be partly based on its 
potential and specific inhibitory actions toward NF-
κB activation (20), lipid peroxidation (29) or lipoxy-
genase activity (16). It has been recently reported 
that the infarct volume and degree of neurological 
Address correspondence to: Dr. Shoei Furukawa
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gifu Pharmaceutical 
University, Daigaku-nishi 1-25-4, Gifu 501-1196, Japan
Tel: +81-58-230-8122, Fax: +81-58-230-8105
E-mail: furukawa@gifu-pu.ac.jp
M. Kasai et al.2
quently once a week by observers blinded to the 
experimental treatments and was continued up to 28 
days after the injury.
Tissue preparation for immunohistochemical analy-
sis. The animals were deeply anesthetized by an in-
traperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital and 
then cardio-perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde 
(PFA) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The spi-
nal cord tissues including the lesion site were dissect-
ed out and post-fixed in the same fixative overnight 
at 4°C. The tissues were then soaked in cold PBS 
containing 20% sucrose for 15 h, and frozen in em-
bedding compound (Sakura Finetek, Tokyo, Japan). 
Frozen sections (25-μm thickness) were prepared 
with a cryostat (model CM 1800; Leica, Nussloch, 
Germany) and then put on adhesive-coated slides 
(Matsunami, Osaka, Japan).
Immunohistochemical analysis. Immunohistochemi-
cal analysis was performed by the method of Kasai 
et al. (12). Cryostat sections were fixed in 4% PFA 
solution for 10 min at room temperature and rinsed 
for 30 min at 37°C in 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) 
containing 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100. After having 
been washed with PBS, the sections were blocked 
for 30 min at room temperature in PBS containing 
2% Block Ace and then reacted with the diluted pri-
mary antibody specific for glial fibrillary acidic pro-
tein (GFAP, 1 : 1000; Dakocytomation, Glostrup, 
Denmark) for appropriate times at 4°C. After anoth-
er wash with PBS, the sections were incubated with 
a fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibody for 
3 h at room temperature (Alexa 546-conjugated goat 
anti-rabbit IgG, 1 : 1000; purchased from Invitrogen, 
Carlsbad, CA). Finally, the slides were washed with 
PBS and coverslipped with PermaFluor Aqueous 
Mounting Medium (Thermoshandon, Waltham, CA). 
The images were observed with a confocal laser mi-
croscope (LSM 510; Zeiss).
Image analysis. For GFAP staining, horizontal sec-
tions were prepared. The lesion size of the injury 
site was measured by tracing the lesion area within 
the borders of the lesions as defined by GFAP label-
ing through 5 representative horizontal sections 
made 0.1 and 0.2 mm ventral to the midline, at the 
midline, and 0.1 and 0.2 mm dorsal to the midline 
in each rat. The mean value of the lesion size in the 
5 sections was considered as the value for each ani-
mal.
deficit induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion 
become smaller in CAPE-administered animals due 
to CAPE-mediated inhibition of the oxidative stress 
and inflammation (1, 14). These observations prompt-
ed us to examine the possible ameliorative effect of 
CAPE on traumatic SCI, because no reports on it 
have yet emerged.
　Therefore, in the present study we evaluated the 
effect of CAPE on functional locomotor recovery 
after SCI and the anti-inflammatory effect of CAPE 
in the injury site. Conspicuously, CAPE enhanced 
the recovery of locomotor function and reduced the 
lesion size in the injured spinal cord while suppress-
ing the expression of the mRNAs for a pro-inflam-
matory cytokine IL-1β and the inflammatory enzymes 
iNOS and COX-2. These results suggest CAPE to 
be a promising therapeutic tool for reducing the sec-
ondary neuronal damage following primary physical 
injury to the spinal cord.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal surgery. Female Wistar rats (7 weeks of age, 
weighing 120–140 g; Japan SLC, Hamamatsu, Ja-
pan) were used in this study, and they were handled 
in accordance with the Guidelines of Experimental 
Animal Care issued by the Office of the Prime Min-
ister of Japan. The surgery was performed according 
to the method reported previously (11, 13, 15). Brief-
ly, the rats were anesthetized with sodium pentobar-
bital (40 mg/kg body weight), after which the spinal 
cord (left side) was hemi-transected or not (sham 
control) by use of microsurgical scissors after lami-
nectomy at the level of the 10th thoracic vertebra. 
After arrest of hemorrhage, the muscle and skin 
were sutured. The rats were then placed in normal 
cages and given free access to food and water.
Administration of CAPE. CAPE was a generous gift 
from Api Co., Ltd., Gifu, Japan. It was diluted with 
sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 
1% ethanol and intraperitoneally injected into the 
animals (2 or 10 μmol/kg) immediately after the 
injury and then once every 24 h for 28 days. The 
vehicle-treated animals received PBS containing eth-
anol whose final concentration was equal to that of 
the CAPE solution.
Assessment of locomotor function. Locomotor func-
tion of the left hindlimb was assessed by the Basso, 
Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor rating 
scale in open-field as described earlier (3). Evalua-
tion was performed 1 day after injury and subse-
Spinal cord repair by CAPE 3
assessment of bilaterally impaired hindlimb function 
following contusive SCI, but it has been also used 
for lateral hemi-transection SCI (11, 13, 15). Hemi-
transection of the spinal cord resulted in complete 
paralysis of the hindlimb ipsilateral to the transec-
tion side (left) for several days in all groups. Al-
though the locomotor function of the rats of all 
groups was improved by 28 days after the surgery, 
the rats treated with CAPE at 10 μmol/kg main-
tained significantly better hindlimb locomotor per-
formance than the vehicle-treated rats from 14–28 
days (Fig. 1). The CAPE-treated (10 μmol/kg) rats 
attained over 11 points of BBB score, which reflects 
consistent weight-supported hindlimb movements; 
whereas the vehicle-treated rats demonstrated only 
limited hindlimb weight bearing (nearly 9 points of 
BBB score). No improvement in locomotor activity 
was observed in the rats treated with the low dose 
of CAPE (2 μmol/kg) throughout the experimental 
period (Fig. 1).
CAPE reduces the lesion size in the injured spinal 
cord
To assess histologically the anti-inflammatory effect 
of CAPE on the injured spinal cord, we measured 
the lesion size of the injured spinal cord by outlin-
ing the lesion area defined as GFAP labeling on ex-
perimental day 28. Compared with the vehicle-treated 
rats, the rats that had received daily administration 
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) analysis of expression of inflammation- 
inducible genes. For the RT-PCR experiment, the 
spinal cords were dissected out immediately after 
the hemitransection or 1, 3, 7 or 14 days later; and 
the segments just rostral or caudal to the injury site 
(2-mm length each) were collected. Total RNA was 
isolated from the collected spinal cord segments by 
using TRIZOL Reagent (Invitrogen) according to 
the manufacturer’s instruction. RT-PCR was per-
formed as described previously (12) to assess the 
mRNA level of IL-1β, iNOS and COX-2. The se-
quences of primers used were as follow: forward 
primer, 5’-GCCGTCTTCCCCTCCATCGT-3’, and 
reverse primer, 5’-CCCGTCTCCGGAGTCCAT 
CA-3’, for β-actin; IL-1β forward primer, 5’-CTTG 
GGCTGTCCAGATGAGAGCAT-3’, and reverse 
primer, 5’-GAAGACACGGGTTCCATGGTGA 
AG-3’ for IL-1β; forward primer, 5’-GCTGGAGGT 
GACCATGGAGCAT-3’, and reverse primer, 5’-CC 
TGGCTAGCGCTTCCGACTTT-3’, for iNOS; and 
forward primer, 5’-TGAAGCCCACCCCAAACAC 
AGT-3’, and reverse primer, 5’-TTGGGGATCCGG 
GATGAACTCT-3’, for COX-2. The amplification 
was carried out with a thermal cycler at 94°C for 
5 min, followed by 24 (for β-actin), 35 (for iNOS or 
COX-2) or 38 (for IL-1β) cycles consisting of 94°C 
for 30 s, 63°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 45 or 60 s. 
β-Actin was used as the internal control. After am-
plification, the PCR products were subjected to 2% 
agarose gel electrophoresis and then visualized by 
ethidium bromide staining. The images were cap-
tured with FLA-5100 (FUJIFILM, Tokyo, Japan). 
The optical density of each band was quantified by 
utilizing image-analysis software (NIH ImageJ).
Statistical analysis. All numerical data were present-
ed as group mean values with standard deviation 
(SD). Statistical analyses of gene expressions in the 
injury site and locomotor function assessed by using 
the BBB scale were performed by two-way analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Bonferroni 
post-test. A statistically significant difference in the 
size of the lesion site was determined by performing 
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
RESULTS
CAPE improves locomotor function after SCI
We evaluated the effect of 2 doses of CAPE on the 
locomotor activity of the left hindlimb for over 28 
days after the SCI by using the BBB locomotor rat-
ing scale. This scale was originally developed for 
Fig. 1　CAPE improves locomotor function of the animals 
with SCI. The changes in locomotor function of the vehicle- 
(n = 9) or CAPE-treated animals (2 μmol/kg; n = 6, 10 μmol/
kg; n = 9) were assessed for 28 days after SCI. Only the 
group treated with the high-dose CAPE (10 μmol/kg) 
showed a significant behavioral improvement compared 
with that for the vehicle-treated group. The values of BBB 
score are expressed as the mean ± SD. Significant differ-
ences from the vehicle-treated group were determined by 
using repeated measures of two-way ANOVA followed by 
Bonferroni post-test. Significance: ***P < 0.001.
M. Kasai et al.4
able elevation of the level of iNOS mRNA in the 
lesion site during 14 days after injury (Fig. 3B). 
Likewise, the injury-induced COX-2 expression lev-
el was significantly lower at 1, 3 or 7 days after the 
injury when the high-dose CAPE was administered 
than when the vehicle was used (Fig. 3C). The low-
dose CAPE (2 μmol/kg) was ineffective throughout 
the experimental period (Fig. 3A–C).
DISCUSSION
In the present study, we found that CAPE attenuated 
the mRNA expression for the pro-inflammatory cy-
tokine IL-1β and inflammatory enzymes iNOS and 
COX-2 in the injured spinal cord, which was fol-
lowed by significant improvement of hindlimb loco-
motor activity after SCI. The decreased lesion size 
was thought to be a consequence of these actions of 
CAPE. To our knowledge, this is the first report to 
identify the active component of propolis to repair 
traumatic SCI. Propolis has been used in folk medi-
cine in many regions of the world for centuries (8). 
In light of this finding, it may be greatly advanta-
geous for patients with SCI to ingest this natural 
compound, i.e., CAPE, as a supplement or whole 
propolis for treatment, which intake would be both 
safe and easy.
　Inflammation that occurs after central nervous 
system injury causes secondary injury facilitating 
neuronal dysfunction (4, 7). Harmful actions are at 
least partly due to the production of NO, reactive 
oxygen species, and inflammatory cytokines (17, 
32). Transcripts of pro-inflammatory cytokines are 
rapidly up-regulated after traumatic SCI. IL-1β is a 
major pro-inflammatory cytokine that activates the 
transcription factor NF-κB, which stimulates gene 
transcription of inflammation enzymes such as iNOS 
and COX-2 in the injured spinal cord, resulting in 
of 10 μmol/kg of CAPE showed a significantly 
smaller lesion size (Fig. 2). There was no significant 
difference in the lesion size between the vehicle-
treated and the low-dose (2 μmol/kg) CAPE-treated 
rats (Fig. 2).
CAPE attenuates the expression of inflammation-in-
ducible genes in the SCI site
Finally, we examined the mRNA expression level of 
genes of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β and in-
flammatory mediators iNOS and COX-2 in the inju-
ry site by using the RT-PCR method. The expression 
of IL-1β mRNA markedly increased and attained its 
maximal level 1 day after SCI, and gradually de-
creased to the original level irrespective of CAPE 
administration. It was significantly lower when the 
animals were treated with the high-dose (10 μmol/
kg) CAPE than when they were given the vehicle at 
times of 1, 3, 7 or 14 days after the SCI (Fig. 3A). 
Similar results were observed for the iNOS mRNA 
expression; i.e., the high-dose CAPE (10 μmol/kg) 
significantly suppressed the lesion-induced remark-
Fig. 2　CAPE reduces the lesion size. A–C, Representa-
tive sections of the injured spinal cord including the lesion 
site were prepared from the rats (n = 3 for all groups) ad-
ministered vehicle (A), 2 μmol/kg (B) or 10 μmol/kg of 
CAPE (C) for 28 days after SCI, and stained for GFAP. 
The area surrounded by GFAP staining was compared 
between CAPE-treated and the vehicle-treated groups. D, 
Quantitative analysis confirmed that the lesion size in the 
CAPE-treated group (10 μmol/kg) was significantly smaller 
than that in the vehicle-treated group. The left is rostral, 
and the right, caudal, in panels “A”, “B”, and “C”. The val-
ues are expressed as the mean ± SD. Significant differ-
ences from the vehicle-treated group were determined by 
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test. Signifi-
cance: *P < 0.05. Scale bar: 200 μm.
Spinal cord repair by CAPE 5
secondary injury (19, 22). The administration of an 
IL-1 receptor antagonist reduces IL-1β production in 
the spinal cord, diminishes apoptosis, and enhances 
locomotor functional recovery after SCI (21). There-
fore, it is plausible that the SCI induces an exces-
sive inflammatory reaction via facilitated production 
of IL-1β and initiates apoptosis to suppress locomo-
tor recovery. Alternatively, CAPE may directly in-
hibit transcriptional activity of NF-κB irrespective 
of down-regulation of IL-1β gene expression, be-
cause it has been reported that CAPE prevents the 
binding of NF-κB to DNA (20). In fact, an NF-κB 
decoy ameliorates behavior outcomes in SCI animal 
models (25), supporting the involvement of NF-κB 
in the CAPE-dependent amelioration of locomotor 
function.
　In the CNS, NO is involved in a variety of bio-
logical processes to maintain homeostasis; however, 
it also plays a detrimental role by acting as a potent 
oxidant during pathophysiological processes occur-
ring in neural tissues including those caused by SCI 
(5). In fact, a high amount of NO is closely in-
volved in the development of pathological processes 
in vivo, such as post-traumatic spinal cord cavitation 
(18). After traumatic SCI, iNOS is predominantly 
expressed in inflammatory cells infiltrating into the 
damaged tissue (5, 27), and suppression of SCI-
evoked iNOS expression is thought to be a strategy 
to ameliorate abnormal locomotor activity (11, 24). 
Given the potent ability of CAPE to inhibit iNOS 
expression, as previously reported (14) and as 
shown in the present study (Fig. 3), CAPE becomes 
a promising candidate molecule for the treatment of 
cord injuries.
　COX, a prostaglandin H/G synthase, is the rate-
limiting enzyme in the metabolism of free arachi-
donic acid leading to the formation of prostaglandins 
(PGs). The inducible isoform, COX-2, is expressed 
primarily in the CNS and in activated immune cells 
such as macrophages (10) and causes the inflamma-
tory response after SCI. PGs themselves have a 
pathogenic effect in SCI, but COX-2 also produces 
hydroxyl radicals that cause lipid peroxidation (26). 
Pharmacologic down-regulation of COX-2 reduces 
the lesion volume and enhances locomotor recovery 
(9, 26), suggesting that COX-2 causes deterioration 
of neural function after SCI. CAPE inhibited SCI-
induced COX-2 mRNA expression in the lesion site, 
which may have contributed to amelioration of the 
impaired locomotion.
　In addition to CAPE, we have found that ethanol 
extract of Chinese propolis (EECP) (13) and low-
molecular-weight substances such as pyrroloquino-
Fig. 3　CAPE attenuates the expression of inflammation- 
inducible genes in the SCI site. Time-courses of injury- 
induced expression of IL-1β (A), iNOS (B), and COX-2 (C) 
mRNAs in the spinal cords after intraperitoneal administra-
tion of vehicle (n = 3) or CAPE (2 μmol/kg; n = 3, 10 μmol/kg; 
n = 5). The mRNA expression level of IL-1β in the injury site 
was significantly lower in the high-dose (10 μmol/kg) CAPE-
treated group than in the vehicle-treated group on experi-
mental days 1, 3, 7, and 14 (A). The expression of iNOS 
mRNA was significantly inhibited in the high-dose CAPE-
treated group compared with that in the vehicle-treated 
group during 14 days after SCI (B). The expression level of 
COX-2 mRNA was significantly decreased in the high-dose 
CAPE-treated group when compared with that for the vehi-
cle-treated group at 1, 3, and 7 days following SCI (C). The 
low-dose (2 μmol/kg) CAPE did not affect the expression 
levels of these mRNAs throughout the entire experimental 
period (A–C). The values are expressed as the mean±SD. 
Significant differences from the vehicle-treated group were 
determined by using two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni 
post-test. Significance: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
M. Kasai et al.6
line quinone (PQQ), which is a natural redox cofactor 
that acts as a nutrient, antioxidant, and redox modu-
lator (11), improve functional recovery of locomotor 
activity. Particularly, EECP, PQQ, and CAPE are 
similar in that they effectively reduce iNOS gene 
expression in the injury site and ameliorate the lo-
comotor recovery of rats with lateral hemi-transec-
tion of the spinal cord. However, it should be noted 
that EECP and PQQ only accelerated the rate of 
functional recovery after the injury, but did not 
change the maximal point of BBB scale finally at-
tained. In the case of CAPE, significant improve-
ment of the recovery from the motor paralysis lasted 
over 28 days. Considering this superiority of CAPE, 
some unknown action mechanism(s) such as modu-
lation of intracellular signal transduction in neurons 
to facilitate axonal growth might be involved in 
the improvement of locomotor activity. In fact, we 
have preliminary results (Kasai et al., unpublished 
results) showing that CAPE activates the mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular sig-
nal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 signaling pathway 
(ERK1/2) in neurons cultured from embryonic rat 
cerebral cortex. The ERK1/2 signaling is involved 
in regulatory mechanisms of neuritegenesis (30). 
Further investigations are needed to elucidate this 
issue.
　Although there are several problems for the clini-
cal use of CAPE such as clarification of the critical 
action mechanism(s) and pharmacokinetics to decide 
the validity of administering CAPE by oral adminis-
tration, CAPE may be expected as a promising ther-
apeutic tool for the treatment of traumatic SCI.
Acknowledgment
We thank Api Co. Ltd for having generously pro-
vided the CAPE used presently.
REFERENCES
 1. Altug ME, Serarslan Y, Bal R, Kontas T, Ekici F, Melek IM, 
Aslan H and Duman T (2008) Caffeic acid phenethyl ester 
protects rabbit brains against permanent focal ischemia by 
antioxidant action: a biochemical and planimetric study. 
Brain Res 1201, 135–142.
 2. Banskota AH, Tezuka Y and Kadota S (2001) Recent prog-
ress in pharmacological research of propolis. Phytother Res 
15, 561–571.
 3. Basso DM, Beattie MS and Bresnahan JC (1995) A sensitive 
and reliable locomotor rating scale for open field testing in 
rats. J Neurotrauma 12, 1–21.
 4. Bethea JR, Castro M, Keane RW, Lee TT, Dietrich WD and 
Yezierski RP (1998) Traumatic spinal cord injury induces nu-
clear factor-kappaB activation. J Neurosci 18, 3251–3260.
 5. Conti A, Miscusi M, Cardali S, Germano A, Suzuki H, 
Cuzzocrea S and Tomasello F (2007) Nitric oxide in the in-
jured spinal cord: synthases cross-talk, oxidative stress and 
inflammation. Brain Res Rev 54, 205–218.
 6. Dumont RJ, Okonkwo DO, Verma S, Hurlbert RJ, Boulos 
PT, Ellegala DB and Dumont AS (2001) Acute spinal cord 
injury, part I: pathophysiologic mechanisms. Clin Neurophar-
macol 24, 254–264.
 7. Dusart I and Schwab ME (1994) Secondary cell death and 
the inflammatory reaction after dorsal hemisection of the rat 
spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 6, 712–724.
 8. Ghisalberti EL (1979) Propolis: a review. Bee World 60, 59–
84.
 9. Hains BC, Yucra JA and Hulsebosch CE (2001) Reduction of 
pathological and behavioral deficits following spinal cord 
contusion injury with the selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibi-
tor NS-398. J Neurotrauma 18, 409–423.
10. Herschman HR (1996) Prostaglangin synthase-2. Biochim 
Biophys Acta 1299, 125–140.
11. Hirakawa A, Shimizu K, Fukumitsu H and Furukawa S (2009) 
Pyrroloquinoline quinone attenuates iNOS gene expression in 
the injured spinal cord. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 378, 
308–312.
12. Kasai M, Jikoh T, Fukumitsu H and Furukawa S (2010) 
FGF-2-responsive and spinal cord-resident cells improve lo-
comotor function after spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma, in 
press.
13. Kasai M, Fukumitsu H, Soumiya H and Furukawa S (2010) 
Ethanol extract of Chinese propolis facilitates functional re-
covery of locomotor activity after spinal cord injury. Evid 
Based Complement Alternat Med doi: 10.1155/2011/749627.
14. Khan M, Elango C, Ansari MA, Singh I and Singh AK (2007) 
Caffeic acid phenethyl ester reduces neurovascular inflamma-
tion and protects rat brain following transient focal cerebral 
ischemia. J Neurochem 102, 365–377.
15. King VR, Huang WL, Dyall SC, Curran OE, Priestley JV 
and Michael-Titus AT (2006) Omega-3 fatty acids improve 
recovery, whereas omega-6 fatty acids worsen outcome, after 
spinal cord injury in the adult rat. J Neurosci 26, 4672–4680.
16. Laranjinha J, Vieira O, Madeira V and Almeida L (1995) 
Two related phenolic antioxidants with opposite effects on 
vitamin E content in low density lipoproteins oxidized by 
ferrylmyoglobin: consumption vs regeneration. Arch Biochem 
Biophys 323, 373–381.
17. Martiney JA, Cuff C, Litwak M, Berman J and Brosnan CF 
(1998) Cytokine-induced inflammation in the central nervous 
system revisited. Neurochem Res 23, 349–359.
18. Matsuyama Y, Sato K, Kamiya M, Yano J, Iwata H and 
Isobe K (1998) Nitric oxide: a possible etiologic factor in 
spinal cord cavitation. J Spinal Disord 11, 248–252.
19. Miscusi M, Ebner F, Ceccariglia S, Menegazzi M, Mariotto S, 
Berra L, Del Fa A, Gangitano C, Lauretti L, Missori P, 
Delfini R and Suzuki H (2006) Early nuclear factor-kappaB 
activation and inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in 
injured spinal cord neurons correlating with a diffuse reduc-
tion of constitutive nitric oxide synthase activity. J Neurosurg 
Spine 4, 485–493.
20. Natarajan K, Singh S, Burke TR Jr, Grunberger D and 
Aggarwal BB (1996) Caffeic acid phenethyl ester is a potent 
and specific inhibitor of activation of nuclear transcription 
factor NF-kappa B. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93, 9090–9095.
21. Nesic O, Xu GY, McAdoo D, High KW, Hulsebosch C and 
Perez-Pol R (2001) IL-1 receptor antagonist prevents apopto-
sis and caspase-3 activation after spinal cord injury. J Neu-
rotrauma 18, 947–956.
Spinal cord repair by CAPE 7
22. Newton R, Kuitert LM, Bergmann M, Adcock IM and 
Barnes PJ (1997) Evidence for involvement of NF-kappaB 
in the transcriptional control of COX-2 gene expression by 
IL-1beta. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 237, 28–32.
23. O’Neill LA and Kaltschmidt C (1997) NF-kappa B: a crucial 
transcription factor for glial and neuronal cell function. 
Trends Neurosci 20, 252–258.
24. Pannu R, Barbosa E, Singh AK and Singh I (2005) Attenua-
tion of acute inflammatory response by atorvastatin after spi-
nal cord injury in rats. J Neurosci Res 79, 340–350.
25. Rafati DS, Geissler K, Johnson K, Unabia G, Hulsebosch C, 
Nesic-Taylor O and Perez-Polo JR (2008) Nuclear factor-
kappaB decoy amelioration of spinal cord injury-induced in-
flammation and behavior outcomes. J Neurosci Res 86, 566–
580.
26. Resnick DK, Graham SH, Dixon CE and Marion DW (1998) 
Role of cyclooxygenase 2 in acute spinal cord injury. J Neu-
rotrauma 15, 1005–1013.
27. Satake K, Matsuyama Y, Kamiya M, Kawakami H, Iwata H, 
Adachi K and Kiuchi K (2000) Nitric oxide via macrophage 
iNOS induces apoptosis following traumatic spinal cord inju-
ry. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 85, 114–122.
28. Schwab ME and Bartholdi D (1996) Degeneration and re-
generation of axons in the lesioned spinal cord. Physiol Rev 
76, 319–370.
29. Sud’ina GF, Mirzoeva OK, Pushkareva MA, Korshunova 
GA, Sumbatyan NV and Varfolomeev SD (1993) Caffeic 
acid phenethyl ester as a lipoxygenase inhibitor with antioxi-
dant properties. FEBS Lett 329, 21–24.
30. Wu H, Ichikawa S, Tani C, Zhu B, Tada M, Shimoishi Y, 
Murata Y and Nakamura Y (2009) Docosahexaenoic acid in-
duces ERK1/2 activation and neuritogenesis via intracellular 
reactive oxygen species production in human neuroblastoma 
SH-SY5Y cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1791, 8–16.
31. Xu J, Kim GM, Chen S, Yan P, Asmed SH, Ku G, Beckman 
JS, Xu XM and Hsu CY (2001) iNOS and nitrotyrosine ex-
pression after spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 18, 523–
532.
32. Zhang Z, Krebs CJ and Guth L (1997) Experimental analysis 
of progressive necrosis after spinal cord trauma in the rat: 
etiological role of the inflammatory response. Exp Neurol 
143, 141–152.
