Development/Plasticity/Repair
Axon Regeneration Can Facilitate or Suppress Hindlimb
Function after Olfactory Ensheathing Glia Transplantation
Aya Takeoka,1 Devin L. Jindrich,1,3 Cintia Muñoz-Quiles,4 Hui Zhong,1 Rubia van den Brand,1 Daniel L. Pham,1
Matthias D. Ziegler,1 Almudena Ramón-Cueto,5 Roland R. Roy,1,2 V. Reggie Edgerton,1,2 and Patricia E. Phelps1,2
1Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology and 2Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, 3Department of Kinesiology,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, 4Fundación Investigación en Regeneración del Sistema Nervioso, 46019 Valencia, Spain, and 5Instituto de
Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 46010 Valencia, Spain
Reports based primarily on anatomical evidence suggest that olfactory ensheathing glia (OEG) transplantation promotes axon regener-
ation across a complete spinal cord transection in adult rats. Based on functional, electrophysiological, and anatomical assessments, we
found that OEG promoted axon regeneration across a complete spinal cord transection and that this regeneration altered motor re-
sponses over time. At 7 months after transection, 70% of OEG-treated rats showed motor-evoked potentials in hindlimb muscles after
transcranial electric stimulation. Furthermore, a complete spinal cord retransection performed 8months after injury demonstrated that
this axon regeneration suppressed locomotor performance and decreased the hypersensitive hindlimbwithdrawal response tomechan-
ical stimulation. OEG transplantation alone promoted reorganization of lumbosacral locomotor networks and, when combined with
long-term training, enhanced some stepping measures. These novel findings demonstrate that OEG promote regeneration of mature
axons across a complete transection and reorganization of spinal circuitry, both of which contribute to sensorimotor function.
Introduction
Adult rodent spinal cords retain an inherent plasticity to reorga-
nize descending connections that directly influence motor out-
put after incomplete injuries (Bareyre et al., 2004; Courtine et al.,
2008). After a complete spinal cord transection, however,
achieving axon regeneration across the lesion that contributes
to functional recovery remains a difficult challenge. Olfactory
ensheathing glia (OEG) transplantation reportedly promotes tis-
sue sparing, axon remyelination, and improvements in motor
performance in incomplete and complete adult spinal cord injury
(SCI) models (Imaizumi et al., 1998; Ramón-Cueto et al., 2000;
García-Alías et al., 2003; Li et al., 2003; Fouad et al., 2005; Li et al.,
2007; Kubasak et al., 2008; Muñoz-Quiles et al., 2009). However,
the results of SCI studies involving OEG transplantation vary
substantially depending on the injury model, the duration of the
study, and the source, age, and methods used to prepare and
transplant the OEG (Franssen et al., 2007). Promising transplan-
tation candidates that promote axon regeneration are purified
cultures of olfactory bulb-derived, p75-nerve growth factor re-
ceptor (NGFR)-positive OEG (Ramón-Cueto et al., 2000) be-
cause these cells intermingle with astrocytes and migrate well
within the reactive astrocytic environment after injury (Lakatos
et al., 2000, 2003).
OEG transplantation combined with task-specific training
improves the motor function of adult rats with a complete spinal
cord transection (i.e., spinal rats) (Ramón-Cueto et al., 2000;
Kubasak et al., 2008; Muñoz-Quiles et al., 2009), but we know
little about how this treatment promotes functional recovery.
The spinal cord alone is capable of inducing locomotor activity
without supraspinal innervation and can be trained to enhance
the efficacy of locomotion (Edgerton et al., 2004). For example,
long-term step training promotes reorganization of the lumbo-
sacral locomotor circuitry in adult spinal cats by downregulating
inhibitory neurotransmitters associated with interneurons and
somatic motor neurons (Edgerton et al., 1997; de Leon et al.,
1999; Tillakaratne et al., 2000, 2002; Rossignol et al., 2001; Côté
and Gossard, 2003) and by modifying motor neuron excitability
in response to hindlimb loading and sensory stimulation (Côté et
al., 2003). Combined with pharmacological or epidural electrical
stimulation, long-term step training also increases the efficacy of
specific sensorimotor connections and activates specific neurons
during locomotion (Ichiyama et al., 2008; Courtine et al., 2009).
We hypothesized that OEG transplantation combined with
long-term step training promotes both axon regeneration across
the transection and/or reorganization of the lumbosacral loco-
motor circuitry in adult spinal rats. We then asked whether both
regeneration and reorganization attributed to the treatments can
influence functional outcomes. To test this, we used sensorimo-
tor and electrophysiological assessments over 8 months and
performed a complete retransection rostral to the original tran-
section 8 months after the initial lesion. OEG transplantation
Received Sept. 22, 2010; revised Nov. 7, 2010; accepted Dec. 22, 2010.
This work was supported by National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grants R21NS42000-01 and
RO1NS54159.
We thank Dr. J. Gornbein for assistance in the statistical analyses, Dr. R. Ichiyama and S. Zdunowski for expert
advice in behavioral data collection and analyses, Dr. G. Lawson and M. Herrera for the aid in postsurgical animal
care, Drs. Ava Udvadia and Pate Skene for advice on GAP-43 experiments, and Allen Cheng, Alisha Aiello, Kimberly
McFarland, Frank Lee, and numerous University of California, Los Angeles undergraduate students for assistance
with animal care and preparation of data for analyses.
Correspondence should be addressed toDr. Patricia E. Phelps, Department of Integrative Biology andPhysiology,
UCLA, Box 951606, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606. E-mail: pphelps@physci.ucla.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4967-10.2011
Copyright © 2011 the authors 0270-6474/11/314298-13$15.00/0
4298 • The Journal of Neuroscience, March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310
promoted functional axon regeneration across the complete le-
sion, and, when combined with long-term step training, it facil-
itated reorganization of spinal locomotor networks. Moreover,
some of the changes in motor function attributed to OEG trans-
plantation and step training point to facilitation, whereas others
result in suppression of sensorimotor function.
Materials andMethods
OEG culture and transplantation
All procedures followed the National Institutes of Health guidelines
and were approved by the Chancellor’s Animal Research Committee
at UCLA. Methods for OEG culture were adopted from those of
Ramón-Cueto et al. (2000) and Muñoz-Quiles et al. (2009). OEG
were dissected from the outer two olfactory bulb layers of two 8- to
10-week-old male Wistar Hannover rats (Charles River Laboratories)
for transplantation into one spinal rat. Primary cultures were immu-
nopurified against p75-NGFR antibody (1:5) (Chandler et al., 1984)
at 7–8 d and harvested for transplantation at 14 d. Cultures (n  10)
were 95  1% p75-NGFR-positive and expressed S100 and GFAP.
Forty-one female Wistar Hannover rats, 10–12 weeks old, were anes-
thetized with 2–2.5% isoflurane. The spinal cord was completely tran-
sected at approximately T9, leaving the ventral and lateral dura intact.
Injections of DMEM alone or with OEG (200,000 per stump) were in-
jected1mm from the transection site at themidline (coordinates from
the dorsal surface: 1.75, 1.25, 1, and 0.5 m) into both the rostral and
caudal spinal cord stumps. After transplantation, the spine was stabilized
with a stainless steel bar (3.2 cm in length and 0.1 cm in diameter)
attached to the T7 and T13 vertebral processes.
Step training and behavioral analyses
Twoweeks after injury, the rats beganmanual step training on a treadmill
for 20 min/d, 5 d/week for 7.5 months as described by Kubasak et al.
(2008). Stepping ability was evaluated before transection, monthly be-
tween 1 and 7 months after transection, and after spinal cord retransec-
tion at 8 months at treadmill speeds of 10, 13.5, and 17.5 cm/s and with a
body weight support of 85% (i.e., the hindlimbs supported 15% body
weight). Recording of treadmill stepping was conducted as described by
Kubasak et al. (2008). Each trial consisted of 90 s of stepping. The highest
number of plantar steps at three treadmill speeds was sampled for each
rat. At 5 months after transection, spinal rats were injected with quipa-
zine (0.3 mg/kg, i.p.) (Ichiyama et al., 2005), a 5-HT2A receptor agonist,
and stepping ability was tested 15 min later.
We used principal components analysis (PCA) to measure the con-
sistency of the toe trajectories (Fong et al., 2005; Cai et al., 2006).
Briefly, stride transitions were identified visually, kinematics trajec-
tories of toe markers were resampled every 0.1 s, and corresponding
points across all measured steps were averaged. The first principal
component, similar to an average that explains the greatest amount of
variance among trajectories, was calculated and the variance ac-
counted for by the first component was calculated as a “score.” A
larger PCA score (i.e., closer to 100%) represents more consistent
stepping. The best PCA score (percentage) from three treadmill
speeds was sampled for each rat that performed three or more alter-
nating steps. A PCA score of 45%, the lowest PCA percentage mea-
surable as defined by Cai et al. (2006), was assigned for spinal rats that
performed two or fewer alternating steps. We also measured mean
stance length, step height, and trajectory length to characterize the
step patterns during treadmill testing.
Weight-support testing. Rats were supported using a harness con-
nected to an automated body weight-support system (Robomedica)
that lowered 10% of the rat’s body weight every 10 s until the rat
collapsed. The percentage body weight support at collapse was deter-
mined by an observer blind to the experimental status of the rat.
Because ankle joint angles are good indicators of weight-support abil-
ity (Timoszyk et al., 2002), data from rats that collapsed forward were
used to calculate the joint angle as described previously (Ichiyama et
al., 2009). Ankle angle analyses were performed using the Simi three-
dimensional motion.
von Frey test. An experimenter blind to the treatment status of the
spinal rats conducted the von Frey up–down test (Chaplan et al., 1994)
on both hindpaws at 1, 3, 5, and 7 months after transection and 5 d after
spinal cord retransection to determine any injury-induced changes in the
withdrawal threshold. A series of nine hairs (3.61–5.46 g, starting with
the 4.56 g; North Coast Medical) were used to elicit the hindpaw with-
drawal response to determine the 50% withdrawal threshold (grams).
Electrophysiological assessment of hindlimb motor-evoked
potentials
We performed transcranial electric stimulation at 1, 4, and 7 months
after transection of all spinal rats and immediately after and 3 and 5 d
after a retransection on 17 rats. Stimulation of four intact rats also was
studied before and after acute transection. Rats were anesthetized lightly
with 0.7–1% isoflurane and received stimulation on the primary motor
cortex (approximately bregma3.5 to2 mm) using a method modi-
fied from López-Vales et al. (2006) and on the brainstem (approximately
bregma6 to10 mm). Motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) were elicited
by a series of single-pulse stimulations [0.1 ms duration, from 40 to 200
mA in 40 mA increments, 30 times/intensity applied at 30 s intervals;
constant-current stimulator model DS7AH (Digitimer)]. MEPs were re-
corded bilaterally from the tibialis anterior (TA) and medial gastrocne-
mius (MG) muscles with subcutaneously inserted needle electrodes
[needle: 30 gauge (BD Biosciences); wire: 50 m in diameter (California
Fine Wire)]. All MEPs were amplified (1000) and filtered (10–10,000
Hz). Each MEP was defined as a sharp peak with a latency longer than 8
ms and an amplitude larger than 0.05 mV. Electrical stimulation with
high currents as used in this study can potentially introduce artifacts in
MEP recordings as a result of volume conduction, stimulation of axial
spinal musculature, and/or the activation of cutaneous trunci pathways
(Gruner et al., 1993). Direct stimulation artifacts were of very short du-
ration (i.e.,1 ms) and were observed in both media and OEG animals.
Although we cannot exclude the possibility of extraspinal stimulation
artifacts (e.g., via cutaneous trunci pathways), we consider it unlikely that
such a reflex would only occur in OEG rats and would be eliminated by
retransection.
Morphological analyses
Retrograde tracer injections and analyses. Twenty-two chronic spinal rats
(media-untrained, n 5; media-trained, n 7; OEG-untrained, n 5;
OEG-trained, n  5) were injected with horseradish peroxidase conju-
gated with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA–HRP) 8 months after transec-
tion. Additional controls included three intact and three media-injected
spinal rats maintained 1 month after transection. Rats were anesthetized
with 2% isoflurane, and a 0.65l mixture of 5%WGA (Sigma) and 25%
HRP (Sigma) was injected 5mm caudal to the transection in 13 locations
(coordinates expressed in mm: midline, 1.8, 1.4, 1.0, 0.8, and 0.4; at 1.2
mm to the right or left of the midline, 1.6, 1.2, 0.8, and 0.4) as reported
previously (Ramón-Cueto et al., 1998; Muñoz-Quiles et al., 2009). After
72 h, the rats were perfused for tissue analyses.
We sectioned the primary motor cortex and brainstem and mounted
every third section (40mthick) on slides forWGA immunohistochem-
istry. Additionally, every eighth spinal cord section (25 m thick) from
the cervical enlargement and the transection site of all WGA–HRP-
injected spinal rats was processed for WGA immunoreactivity to detect
long propriospinal neurons and to ensure that no tracer leaked into the
lesion core and rostral stump, respectively. None of the rats evaluated for
retrograde tracing data had WGA–HRP leakage into the lesion core or
rostral stump (supplemental Fig. 1C, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material). We used an imaging system (Simple PCI soft-
ware; Compix Imaging Systems, Hamamatsu Corporation) to measure
the optical density of WGA immunoreactivity in brainstem and spinal
cord neurons. The maximum background level of 20 large neurons
outside the regions of interest, i.e., neurons that do not project to the
spinal cord, were measured first to determine the maximal background
level of each section. Cells within the nuclei of interest were detected only
if their optical densitieswere 5%or greater than themaximal background
level. Optical densitometry measurements were performed on every
third section (120 m apart) throughout the red and vestibular nuclei
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4299
and the locus coeruleus and every 12th section
(480 m apart) throughout the reticular for-
mation and raphe nucleus. All measurements
were performed blind to the transplantation or
training status of the rats.
Tissue preparation. Rats were anesthetized
deeply with ketamine (100mg/kg, i.p.) and xy-
lazine (5 mg/kg, i.p.), perfused with 4% para-
formaldehyde, and postfixed at 4°C for 4 h.
Spinal cords, brains, and brainstems were dis-
sected and cryoprotected.
Antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies used in-
cluded the following: anti-GFAP (1:1000; BD
Pharmingen), anti-Neuronal-specific Nuclear
protein (NeuN) (1:100), and anti-GAP43 (1:
10,000; Millipore Corporation). Polyclonal
antibodiesused included the following: goat anti-
WGA (1:2000; Vector Laboratories), goat anti-
5-HT (1:20,000; ImmunoStar), and rabbit
anti-GFAP (1:30,000; Dako).
Immunohistochemistry and lesion site analy-
ses.We sectioned the transection site in the sag-
ittal plane (25 m) and mounted the sections
on a series of 16 slides such that every 16th
section was mounted on a slide. All immuno-
histochemistry procedures with diamino-
benzidine (DAB), followed the monoclonal,
polyclonal, or double immunolabeling proto-
cols described previously (Takeoka et al., 2009,
2010). For immunofluorescence of GFAP and
NeuN, we omitted the presoak and Triton
X-100 steps. Species appropriate Alexa Fluor
488 and 584 (1:200; Invitrogen) were used for
localization.
Quantification of 5-HT axons and GAP43 so-
mata. 5-HT axons were quantified as reported
by Takeoka et al. (2009). GAP43-positive so-
mata present in the lower thoracic cord caudal
to the original lesion were quantified in every
eighth section of the caudal stump andnormal-
ized based on tissue volume.
Volume of the lesion core and associated cavi-
ties. Approximately 85% of the lesion site was
GFAP labeled to delineate the lesion core and
to anatomically confirm that all transections
were complete. In all rats, the GFAP-negative
core always separated the GFAP-positive ros-
tral and caudal stumps as reported in our pre-
vious study (Kubasak et al., 2008). The volume
of the lesion core and the associated cavities
was quantified as reported (Kubasak et al.,
2008). We outlined the GFAP-negative tran-
section site and the nearby cavities of all rats
injected with the retrograde tracer (n  22
rats). The GFAP-positive area was subtracted
from the total section area in every eighth sec-
tion (25 m thick) and normalized based on
tissue volume. We focused on differences be-
tween the media and OEG groups because
there were no training effects.
Length of the non-neuronal tissue and lesion
core.Wedouble labeled every eighth section for
GFAP and NeuN to estimate the extent of
lesion-induced neuronal degeneration in spi-
nal cord tissue rostral and caudal to the injury site. We measured (1) the
shortest distance betweenNeuN-labeled neurons and the GFAP-positive
border adjacent to the GFAP-negative lesion core in both the rostral and
caudal stumps and (2) the total lengths of the non-neuronal region and
the lesion core.
Statistical analyses. The nonparametric Mann–Whitney test was
used for the von Frey analyses. All other statistical comparisons were
conducted with nonparametric resampling analyses to compare group
mean differences and minimize the assumptions on the underlying data
distribution (Efron and Tibshirani, 1991).
Figure 1. OEG transplantation and long-term step training influence locomotor function in spinal rats. A, Ankle flexion and
extension (highlighted in pink) are critical for successful plantar stepping, which is rarely achieved by adult spinal rats. Stepping is
oriented toward the left (stick representation is sampled every 0.2 s). Step heights of spinal plantar steppers are usually not as high
as thoseof intact rats. Foot (pink) is placedvertical to the treadmill during successful plantar stepsperformedby intact rats that step
on their footpads,whereas the foot of nonplantar steppers anddraggers is parallel to the treadmill.B, Step trajectories of intact rats
are consistent,whereas those of spinal rats are erratic. Each colored line indicates a single step, and the thick red line represents the
average trajectory. Step height is lower and stance and step trajectory lengths are shorter in media- and OEG-injected spinal rats
than intact rats. C, OEG-untrained rats generatedmore plantar steps thanmedia-untrained rats at 1, 3, and 5months (*p 0.05)
and more plantar steps than OEG-trained rats at 1 month ( #p 0.05). D, PCA showed that both OEG groups produced more
consistent step trajectories than both media groups at 1, 3, and 5 months (*p 0.05). OEG-untrained rats scored higher than
OEG-trained rats at 1month ( #p 0.05). E, OEG andmedia groups differed in their stance and trajectory lengths at all time points
(*p 0.05). F, Step training improved the number of plantar steps taken in 10 s in response to 5-HT2A receptor activation (*p
0.05; see supplemental videos, available atwww.jneurosci.org as supplementalmaterial). Data for individual rats are represented
as a circle or square.G,H, OEG injection but not step training enhanced step consistency (G) and stance and trajectory lengths (H )
after quipazine injection (*p 0.05). I, OEG-trained rats exhibit better ankle extension than all other rats when the hindlimbs
support up to 10% of their body weight at 7 months after transection (*p 0.05). Data are mean SEM.
4300 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
Results
After a complete spinal cord transection at T9, spinal rats re-
ceived injections of olfactory bulb-derived OEG suspended in
media or media alone. Long-term step training of one half of the
spinal rats started 2 weeks after transection and continued for 20
min/d, 5 d/week for 7.5 months. The four experimental groups
were as follows: media-untrained (n  9), media-trained (n 
10), OEG-untrained (n  11), and OEG-trained (n  9). Eight
months after the initial transection, 50% of the spinal rats re-
ceived a complete retransection rostral to the original lesion, and
the remaining 50% were injected with a retrograde tracer.
OEG transplantation improves hindlimb step performance
Plantar foot placement during hindlimb stepping requires a se-
ries of joint movements, i.e., knee and ankle flexion during the
swing phase and ankle extension during the stance phase, and is
rarely achieved spontaneously by adult spinal rats (Fig. 1A) (Edg-
erton et al., 2004). Step trajectories of spinal rats measured by
PCAare often erratic comparedwith those of intact rats (Fig. 1B).
To determine whether OEG transplantation promotes hindlimb
stepping ability in adult spinal rats, we first compared the number
of plantar steps taken by media- and OEG-untrained spinal rats.
OEG-untrained rats generated signifi-
cantly more plantar steps than media-
untrained rats at 1–5 months after
transection but not at later time points
(Fig. 1C). Neither the media- nor the
OEG-untrained rats improved their plan-
tar stepping ability over time (Fig. 1C).
Next we asked whether or not there was a
training effect. The average number of
plantar steps did not differ statistically be-
tween the media-untrained and -trained
groups throughout the study (Fig. 1C).
The OEG-untrained group consistently
produced as many or more plantar steps
than the OEG-trained group, with signif-
icant differences detected early in the
study (Fig. 1C).
We used PCA to calculate the consis-
tency of the step trajectories and also com-
pared stance lengths, step heights, and
trajectory lengths. PCA analysis assesses
the ability to produce locomotor move-
ment, i.e., hindlimb alternation with or
without hindlimb plantar placement. The
stepping pattern was more consistent,
represented by higher PCA scores, for
both OEG-untrained and -trained groups
comparedwithmedia groups at 1, 3, and 5
but not at 7 months (Fig. 1D). The OEG-
untrained rats hadhigher PCA scores than
OEG-trained rats at 1 month. Both OEG
groups demonstrated longer stance and
trajectory lengths than media groups
throughout the duration of the study (Fig.
1E). Mean step height did not differ
among groups at any time point, and
there was no improvement in step consis-
tency, step height, or stance and trajectory
lengths over time in any group. Together,
these results indicate that OEG transplan-
tation alone can enhance stepping ability,
and these improvements occurred early in the study with no
change over time.
OEG transplantation and step training improve plantar
stepping ability associated with 5-HT2A receptor activation
Administration of quipazine, a 5-HT2A receptor agonist, can ac-
tivate and modulate the lumbosacral locomotor networks in spi-
nal rats (Gerasimenko et al., 2007; Ichiyama et al., 2008). We
therefore gave a single injection of quipazine 5months after tran-
section to determine the extent to which OEG transplantation
and/or step training affected the locomotor circuitry associated
with 5-HT2A receptors. The administration of quipazine dramat-
ically improved the number of consecutive plantar steps, step-
ping consistency, step height, and stance and step trajectory
lengths in all four treatment groups compared with their predrug
performance (supplemental Videos 1–4, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material). Although we did not
detect a training effect on plantar stepping without quipazine,
activation of the 5-HT2A receptors by quipazine unmasked a re-
finement in plantar stepping ability in media- and OEG-trained
spinal rats (Fig. 1F, 17.5 cm/s). In addition, 5-HT2A receptor
activation resulted in a more consistent stepping pattern (Fig.
Figure 2. Retransection experiments demonstrate that functional regeneration contributes tomotor recovery.A, OEG-injected
rats generate more plantar steps after than before retransection (after minus before retransection; *p 0.01), whereas media-
injected rats do not change ( p 0.34). Data for individual rats are represented as a circle. B, OEG-injected rats have more
consistent step trajectories after than before retransection (*p  0.05). Media groups did not differ. C, After retransection,
OEG-trained rats have longer stance and step trajectory lengths than OEG-untrained rats (*p  0.05). D, E, After quipazine
injection, retransection did not alter the step consistency of any group (D). Only the OEG-trained group had longer stance and step
trajectory lengths after than before retransection (E; *p 0.05). F, Regardless of transplantation or training status, all spinal rats
were hypersensitive to mechanical hindpaw stimulation between 1 and 5 months after transection. At 7 months, media groups
remainedhypersensitive,whereasOEGgroupsbecame less sensitive, i.e., have ahigherwithdrawal threshold (*p0.001). Spinal
cord retransection (retx) reversed the improvement observed in OEG-injected rats ( #p 0.001) but had no effect on media-
injected rats ( p 0.65). Data are mean SEM. OEG-untrained and -trained groups were combined in A and B because of a lack
of a training effect.
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4301
1G) and stance and trajectory lengths
were longer (Fig. 1H) in the OEG com-
pared with the media groups. These re-
sults indicate that long-term step training
and OEG transplantation contributed to
the reorganization of the lumbosacral lo-
comotor networks modified by seroto-
nergic (5-HT) receptor activation.
Only OEG-trained rats show greater
ankle extension during the stand test
The effects of OEG transplantation and
training on weight-support ability were
measured as a part of the evaluation of
locomotor ability. Spinal rats increased
the amount of self-weight support before
collapse between 1 and 4 months regard-
less of treatment (10 1% increase), but
only the OEG-injected groups improved
between 4 and 7 months after transection
(6  1% increase). Step training did not
further enhance standing ability in any
group.
We then measured changes in ankle
extension during standing as an evalua-
tion of weight-support ability (Timoszyk
et al., 2002). At 1 and 4months after tran-
section, themean ankle angles did not dif-
fer across the treatment groups at any
level of weight support ( p  0.05 for all
comparisons). At 7 months, however,
OEG-trained rats demonstrated greater
ankle extension at 0 and 10% body weight
support compared with the other three
groups (Fig. 1 I). Beyond 10%, there were
no group differences. These results indi-
cate that OEG transplantation and step
training together, but not individually,
improved ankle extension up to the
10% body weight load used during step
training.
Plantar stepping ability improves after
retransection only in OEG-injected rats
To test whether axon regeneration con-
tributes to locomotor activity, we com-
pared the number of plantar steps
generated by media or OEG rats before
and after a complete retransection 0.5 cm
rostral to the original lesion. We sub-
tracted the number of plantar steps gener-
ated at 7 months from those produced
after the retransection at 8 months; a pos-
itive number, therefore, indicates a better
stepping performance after retransec-
tion. Because there was no training effect
on the number of plantar steps taken
after retransection, we combined media-
untrained and -trained, and OEG-
untrained and -trained groups. Although the mean number of
plantar steps for the media group did not change after retransec-
tion, the OEG group showed a considerable improvement (Fig.
2A). Remarkably, two OEG-injected spinal rats that never
stepped before retransection generated six to nine plantar steps
after retransection. The number of plantar steps taken after re-
transection was significantly greater in OEG- than media-
injected rats (media, 0.9  0.2; OEG, 1.7  0.4; p  0.05). In
Figure 3. OEG promote functional reconnections of descending pathways across the transection.A, The top trace represents an
MEP (8 ms latency) from the MG of an intact rat in response to brainstem stimulation. The bottom three traces are recordings
from the left MG of an OEG-injected rat. MEPswere not detected 1month after transection. At 7months, a typical MEP had a small
amplitude (0.25 mV) and long latency (20ms). Retransection rostral to the initial transection site abolished the MEP signals
(bottom trace, retx).B, Only OEG-injected rats displayedMEPs at 4 and 7months. Several OEG-injected spinal rats displayedMEPs
to both cortical and brainstem stimulation at 4 and 7 months. C, The MEP amplitude in response to brainstem stimulation was
larger in the OEG-trained than OEG-untrained group (*p 0.05), but the latency did not differ. D, When MEPs were detected in
OEG-injected rats,50%exhibitedMEP inmultiplemuscles at 7months.E,MoreMGmuscles responded tobrainstemstimulation
than TAmuscles at 7 months after injury. Higher stimulation intensities inducedmore MEPs in both muscles. The total number of
muscles across all OEG-injected rats is shown. F, AnOEG-treated ratwithmultipleMEPswith long latencies (*) in the rightMGafter
10 consecutive stimulations at 160 mA. Responses occurred inconsistently (MEP in blue traces and no response in red traces) and
varied in latency and amplitude. G, Both the latency and amplitude of MEPs recorded from OEG rats are different from those from
intact rats (*p 0.05). MEPs in response to cortical and brainstem stimulation are longer in latency and larger in amplitude at 7
than 4months ( #p 0.05). NoMEPswere detected inmedia-injected rats. OEG-untrained and -trained groupswere combined in
B, D, E, and G due to the lack of a training effect.
4302 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
addition, OEG groups demonstratedmore consistent step trajec-
tories after retransection than before, whereas the media groups
did not differ, as determined by PCA (Fig. 2B). There was no
training effect on stepping consistency in either the media or
OEG groups after retransection (data not shown). Stance and
trajectory lengths were longer in OEG-trained than OEG-
untrained rats after retransection, whereas no difference was ob-
served between themedia-trained andmedia-untrained rats (Fig.
2C). The results from the retransection experiments suggest that
OEG implantation promoted axon regeneration across the orig-
inal transection site, and the reestablished connections predom-
inantly acted to suppress locomotor performance.
After the combination of retransection and quipazine injec-
tion, stepping parameters were compared with those before
retransection (5 months) (Fig. 1F). Retransection did not alter
the number of plantar steps in any group (data not shown).
Moreover, consistency of step trajectories (Fig. 2D) or step
heights evaluated with PCA did not differ after retransection
among groups. Only the OEG-trained rats improved their stance
and trajectory lengths after retransection (Fig. 2E). These find-
ings imply that the improvement in step-
ping performance with quipazine reflects
some intraspinal reorganization not di-
rectly dependent on axon regeneration.
OEG transplantation decreases the
withdrawal reflex threshold
The hindlimb flexion response to me-
chanical stimulation primarily represents
a spinally organized sensorimotor re-
sponse (Zemlan et al., 1984). Because
lesion-induced hyper-reflexia is com-
monly associated with SCI (Magladery et
al., 1952; Reese et al., 2006), we used the
von Frey test (Chaplan et al., 1994) to ex-
amine the effects of OEG transplantation
and long-term step training on the
hindlimb withdrawal response to me-
chanical stimulation. Adult intact rats had
a withdrawal threshold of 7.9 1.0 g (n
8). One month after transection, all four
groups of spinal rats were hypersensitive
to stimulation (Fig. 2F) (overall mean,
2.1 0.2 g). Although we did not detect
a training effect at any time point, the
OEG groups were less sensitive to me-
chanical stimulation than the media
groups at 7 months (Fig. 2F). We then
compared the withdrawal threshold be-
fore and after retransection. Retransec-
tion did not alter this response in
media-injected rats but abolished the
improvement in OEG-injected rats.
These findings indicate that functional
connections across the transection me-
diated the reduced hypersensitivity ob-
served in rats with OEG transplantation.
OEG transplantation promotes axon
regeneration across the transection:
electrophysiological evidence
We used transcranial electric stimulation
to evaluate whether OEG promote func-
tional connectivity across the lesion site after a complete spinal
cord transection. Because the stimulation intensity required to
elicit MEPs depends on the type of anesthetic, level of anesthesia,
location of stimulation and recordings, and diameter of stimula-
tion/recording electrodes, we initially performed control experi-
ments on intact rats. Stimulation of both the motor cortex and
brainstem of intact rats (n  4) consistently elicited MEP bilat-
erally in the MG and TA muscles that disappeared after acute
spinal cord transection, indicating thatMEPs detected inMGand
TA are transmitted through the spinal cord. Additionally, MEPs
had longer latencies and/or were eliminated by pharmacological
blockage of excitatory neurotransmitters in intact controls (Pro-
tas et al., 2008), suggesting that evoked potentials with latencies
longer than 1 ms are very likely attributable to neural transmis-
sion. Typical MEPs from intact rats were 2–10 mV with a latency
of 8 ms (Fig. 3A,G). With stronger stimulation intensities,
MEP amplitudes increased, whereas the latencies were unaffected
(data not shown).
The recordings at 1 month after lesion confirmed electro-
physiologically that the spinal cord transections were complete
Figure 4. WGA-immunolabeled somata are present in coronal brainstem sections and parasagittal sections of the cervical
enlargement of intact (A), media-injected (B), and OEG-injected (C) rats. A, WGA–HRP labels projection neurons in five brainstem
nuclei and long propriospinal neurons in laminae VII–VIII of the cervical spinal cord in intact rats.B, C, FewerWGA-positive somata
weredetected inmedia-injected (B) andOEG-injected (C) rats than in the sameareas of intact rats (A). Scale bars: rednucleus, locus
ceruleus, and vestibular nucleus, 100 m; raphe nucleus and reticular formation, 50 m; cervical spinal cord, 25 m. D, The
number ofWGA-labeled somatawere greater in OEG-injected than in short- or long-termmedia groups in all areas (*p 0.05 for
all comparisons) except the reticular formation. Short- and long-term media controls did not differ in brainstem nuclei or in the
cervical spinal cord. WGA-positive somata in the reticular formation did not differ between any groups. Error bars are SEM.
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4303
(Fig. 3A). No media-injected rats responded to stimulation at
either site at any time point. Four months after transection, we
detected MEPs with long latencies and small amplitudes in 15%
(motor cortex, n  1 of 22; brainstem, n  3 of 22) of OEG-
injected rats (Fig. 3B,G). More OEG-injected rats exhibited
MEPs, the mean latency was shorter, and the amplitude was
larger at 7 than 4 months after transection (Fig. 3B,G). When
combined, a total of 70% (motor cortex, 5 of 20; brainstem, 12 of
20) of the OEG-injected rats responded to cortical and/or brain-
stem stimulation at 7 months (Fig. 3B). Brainstem stimulation
elicited relatively stronger MEPs, i.e., shorter latencies and larger
amplitudes, than cortical stimulation (Fig. 3G). In contrast to
intact rats, theMEP amplitudes recorded fromOEG-injected rats
did not increase consistently with increased stimulation intensity
(data not shown). In addition, MEP latencies and amplitudes
were longer and smaller, respectively, in OEG than intact rats
(Fig. 3G). Interestingly, 15% (3 of 20) of OEG-injected rats dis-
playedMEPswith latencies indistinguishable from those in intact
rats, i.e.,8 ms, in response to either motor cortex or brainstem
stimulation at 7 months after transection. Long-term step train-
ing did not influence MEP occurrence because 50% (OEG-
untrained, 7 of 14; OEG-trained, 7 of 14) of the rats with MEPs
were in each OEG group. The mean MEP amplitude, however,
was larger in the OEG-trained than -untrained group despite
no differences in the mean latency between groups (Fig. 3C).
Because fresh muscle weight of bilateral medial gastrocne-
mius, tibialis anterior, soleus, and extensor digitorum longus
examined postmortem did not differ between OEG-untrained
and trained groups (data not shown), the higher MEP ampli-
tude in OEG-trained rats is likely attributable to changes in the
spinal cord reorganization rather than increased muscle mass
from training.
The number of muscles with MEPs in response to either cor-
tical or brainstem stimulation varied in each rat at 7months (Fig.
3D). Seventy-percent (11 of 14) of OEG-injected spinal rats had
responses in two or more muscles, and 21% (3 of 14) of rats had
responses in all four muscles tested. More MEPs were elicited in
the MG than TA at all stimulation intensities in response to both
brainstem and cortical stimulation (Fig. 3E). Although stimula-
tion intensity did not correlate with MEP amplitude, more mus-
cles were recruited with higher stimulation intensities, i.e., more
TA andMG displayed MEPs at the higher stimulation intensities
(Fig. 3E).Many of thesemuscles exhibited inconsistent responses
to the same stimulation intensity, in that not all stimulation
pulses in a series elicited an MEP (incidence of response varied
from 10 to 100%) and the stimulation intensity did not appear to
influence the incidence of response (data not shown). Moreover,
consecutive stimulations at a single intensity could elicit evoked
potentials with different latencies and amplitudes in 30% of the
rats (6 of 14) (Fig. 3F), a phenomenon not observed in intact rats.
This variation suggests that different synaptic reconnectionswere
activated in response to a specific stimulus and that the functional
reconnections of descending pathwayswere not robust enough to
respond to every stimulation.
Eight months after injury, we performed transcranial stimu-
lation on 7media-injected and 10OEG-injected rats immediately
before, immediately after, and 3 and 5 d after retransection to
determine whether these MEP signals represent physiological re-
connections across the original transection site. The MEPs were
abolished after retransection in every rat with detectable evoked
potentials before retransection (Fig. 3A, bottom trace, retx), pro-
viding additional evidence that OEG promoted electrophysi-
ologically viable reconnections across the original lesion.
OEG transplantationmay promote axon regeneration across
the transection: anatomical evidence
Regeneration of descending brainstem and cervical spinal
cord axons
To determine the extent of axon regeneration across the transec-
tion, we injected WGA–HRP into the lower thoracic cords of 3
intact and 22 spinal rats 8 months after transection (media-un-
trained; n  5, media-trained; n  7, OEG-untrained; n  5,
OEG-trained; n  5). None of the spinal rats included in addi-
tional analyses had leakage of WGA–HRP into the lesion core or
the rostral stump (supplemental Fig. 1C, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material). In intact rats, we de-
tected WGA-positive somata in the motor cortex (supplemental
Fig. 1A, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental mate-
rial), red nucleus, locus coeruleus, vestibular nucleus, reticular
formation, raphe nucleus, and cervical enlargement (Fig. 4A).
Based on an objective densitometry method, the number of
WGA-positive somata in the brainstem and rostral spinal cord of
both media and OEG groups was quantified without knowledge
of the experimental status of each rat (Fig. 4B,C). Immunoreac-
tive cells were considered as WGA-positive only when their
optical density was at least 5% greater than themaximum back-
ground level determined in each section (supplemental Fig.
1D–G, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplementalmaterial).
TheWGA-labeled neurons in spinal rats were similar in location,
size, and shape to those found in intact rats (Fig. 4A–C). We
foundmoreWGA-positive somata in the red nucleus, locus coer-
uleus, vestibular nucleus, and raphe nucleus but not in the retic-
ular formation of OEG- than media-injected rats (Table 1, Fig.
4D). There were noWGA-positive somata in the primary motor
cortex of any spinal rat (supplemental Fig. 1B, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material). We detected more
WGA-positive somata in laminae VII, VIII, and X of the cervical
enlargement in OEG- than media-injected rats (Fig. 4D). These
retrogradely labeled cell bodies were round or oval in shape and
20–30m in diameter withmultipolar processes, features typical
of long propriospinal neurons that contact lumbar somatic mo-
tor neurons (Menétrey et al., 1985).
Next we asked whether the number of retrogradely labeled
somata inmedia-injected controls was consistent with spontane-
ous axon regeneration or nonspecific uptake of the tracer. To
address this issue, we injected WGA–HRP into three media-
injected spinal rats 1 month after transection as an additional
control.We detectedWGA-labeled somata in all threemedia rats
Table 1. Quantification of WGA-labeled cell bodies from the retrograde tracing study
Treatment Red nucleus* Locus coeruleus*
Vestibular
nucleus* Raphe nucleus* Reticular formation
Cervical
enlargement*
Sham rats (n 3) 2253 509 789 150 972 266 499 9 1468 138 1361 127
Short-termmedia-injected rats (n 3) 87 51 56 20 34 20 25 6 91 45 20 5
Long-termmedia-injected rats (n 10) 116 30 33 9 47 7 24 7 49 11 19 4
OEG-injected rats (n 10) 199 34 117 21 83 20 67 26 90 30 50 18
More WGA-positive cell bodies were detected in OEG-injected than short- or long-termmedia-injected rats, i.e., controls. *p 0.05, statistical significance between both short- and long-termmedia-injected versus OEG-injected rats.
4304 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
maintained for1month thatpresumablywouldhavenoaxonregen-
eration (Table 1, Fig. 4D).Moreover, the average number of labeled
cells in the brainstem or cervical spinal cord did not differ signifi-
cantly between media rats after 1 or 8 months post-injury. These
results suggest a consistent level of spuriousWGA-labeled somata in
spinal rats rather than spontaneous regeneration (Fig. 4D). Over-
all, detection of more retrogradely labeled cells in the brainstem
(excluding the reticular formation) and spinal cord ofOEG- than
media-injected long-term spinal rats is consistent with our be-
havioral and electrophysiological evidence that OEG transplan-
tation promoted axon regeneration across the transection.
Raphespinal regeneration
To test whether OEG transplantation promotes raphespinal re-
generation, we examined the presence of serotonergic axons
spanning the lesion. We found examples of axons that projected
across both GFAP borders and the GFAP-negative lesion core
only in OEG-injected rats (Fig. 5A). We also observed 5-HT
axons that sprouted within the lesion core in both media- and
OEG-injected rats (Fig. 5B,C), with more found in OEG- than
media-injected rats (Fig. 5D). To determine whether these 5-HT
axons in the lesion core originated from the raphe nucleus or
spinal cord interneurons (Newton and Hamill, 1988; Takeoka et
al., 2009), we examined the original lesion core from retransected
spinal rats and found few 5-HT axons. This finding suggests that
the 5-HT axons that sprouted into the lesion core originated
primarily from raphespinal neurons rather than intraspinal 5-HT
neurons. We did not examine the 5-HT axons in the caudal
stump because they could originate from the rare serotonergic
spinal neurons and do not necessarily represent raphespinal re-
generation (Takeoka et al., 2009).
Ascending axon regeneration
GAP43 is transiently expressed in somata and growing axons of
most neurons during development (Jacobson et al., 1986; Goslin
et al., 1990). After axotomy, adult neurons, such as retinal gan-
glion cells, dorsal root ganglion, and spinal neurons, transiently
express GAP43 in their somata (Doster et al., 1991; Schreyer and
Skene, 1991; Siebert et al., 2010). Because GAP43 is a marker of
recent axotomy, we hypothesized that any ascending axons that
regenerated across the original transection would transiently up-
regulate GAP43 in their cell bodies after retransection 0.5 cm
rostral to the initial site (diagram in Fig. 5E). First, we examined
spinal rats that did not receive a retransection and found no
labeled somata but numerous GAP43-positive axons within the
lesion core, fibers associated with the meninges and penetrating
blood vessels, and labeled axons within the dorsal and ventral
roots (data not shown), in a pattern similar to peripherally de-
rived noradrenergic axons (Takeoka et al., 2010). After retransec-
tion, axotomized GAP43-positive somata filled the rostral stump
Figure 5. Axons regenerate in OEG-injected rats. A, A 5-HT-labeled axon (black, arrowheads) projects into and spans the transection site in an OEG-injected rat. Rostral and caudal
GFAP-positive borders (brown) are at the top and bottom of the image. B, C, Many 5-HT axons (black) cross the rostral GFAP-positive border (brown, at the top) in both media-injected
(B) and OEG-injected (C) rats. D, More 5-HT axons are found within the lesion core of OEG- than media-injected rats (*p 0.02). E, Diagram of the injury site of the retransected spinal
cord. Only GAP43 expression in somata within the caudal stump (*) after retransection suggests axon regeneration of ascending axons. F, G, GAP43-positive cell bodies (black) in media
(F ) and OEG (G) GFAP-positive caudal stumps (brown).H, More GAP43-positive somata are detected in the caudal stump of OEG- thanmedia-injected rats (*p 0.01). Scale bars, 50m.
Data are mean SEM.
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4305
between the initial and retransection sites
in both media and OEG groups (diagram
in Fig. 5E). In contrast, sparse GAP43-
labeled somata occupied the caudal stump
of the retransected cords, primarily in
lamina V with a few cells in lamina X (Fig.
5F,G). These GAP43-labeled somata cau-
dal to the initial transection likely repre-
sent neurons with axons that had
regenerated past the original lesion and
far enough rostrally to be axotomized by
the retransection. This interpretation of
upregulated somatic GAP43 is only valid
in the caudal stump of spinal cord injury
studies that use an initial complete tran-
section, followed by a lengthy period for
axon regeneration to occur, a complete
spinal cord retransection rostral to the
original injury, and then perfusions per-
formed within 14 d after retransection. We
quantified GAP43-labeled cell bodies in the
caudal stump and found more GAP43-
immunopositive somata in OEG than me-
dia groups (Fig. 5H ). These results
suggest that OEG implantation pro-
motes regeneration of ascending axons
and that a limited amount of spontane-
ous regeneration may occur in long-
term, media-injected rats.
OEG preserve tissue and neurons
surrounding the lesion
We measured the volume of the GFAP-
negative lesion core and associated cavitations to determine
whether OEG attenuate tissue degeneration after the injury. The
average volume of the injury site was larger in media- than OEG-
injected rats (Fig. 6A,B), results consistent with our previous
studies (Kubasak et al., 2008; Muñoz-Quiles et al., 2009). We
identified the rostral and caudal stumps with anti-GFAP and
spinal cord neurons with anti-NeuN to evaluate the extent of
injury-induced neuronal degeneration (Fig. 6C). We found
NeuN-labeled cell bodies immediately adjacent to the GFAP-
negative lesion core more often in OEG-injected (Fig. 6D) than
media-injected (Fig. 6C) spinal cords. The distance between the
most proximal NeuN-labeled neuron and the GFAP-negative le-
sion core was shorter in the rostral than in the caudal stump of all
spinal rats (media: rostral, 0.67 0.06 cmand caudal, 1.31 0.11
cm;OEG: rostral, 0.25 0.07 cmand caudal, 0.48 0.06 cm; p
0.05), a result that indicates that more neurons in the rostral
stump were preserved than in the caudal stump. Furthermore,
both the average GFAP-positive non-neuronal zone (Fig. 6E)
and the total distance between neurons located in the rostral and
caudal stumps (Fig. 6F) were shorter in OEG thanmedia groups.
These results suggest thatOEG transplantationpromotes neuronal
survival after a complete transection, and, consequently, in combi-
nationwith a smaller lesion volume, regenerating axonswould have
a shorter distance to project to aneuronal target on the opposite side
of the transection in OEG- thanmedia-injected rats.
p75-NGFR-positive OEG survive 8 months
after transplantation
OEG were prelabeled with Hoechst (Ramón-Cueto et al.,
2000), and, 8months later, we used anti-p75-NGFR to identify
immunolabeled OEG with Hoechst-labeled nuclei in and near
the transection (Pearse et al., 2007; Lankford et al., 2008). We
detected a number of p75-NGFR- and Hoechst-labeled cells
within the spinal stumps (Fig. 7A,B) and the lesion core (Fig.
7C). These putative OEG usually are clustered, frequently
aligned with each other, and form tubular structures (Fig.
7B,C) as reported after transplantation in vivo (Sasaki et al.,
2004). OEG also are characterized by smooth oval nuclei
(Field et al., 2003; Smithson et al., 2010), a feature that distin-
guishes them from macrophages or activated microglia
(Nguyen et al., 1994; Raivich et al., 1998). In addition to OEG,
endogenous Schwann cells that migrate into the core of the
injury also express p75-NGFR and thus are not distinguishable
from OEG. However, colocalized p75-NGFR/Hoechst-labeled
cells in the spinal cord stumps are likely to be OEG because
Schwann cells do not integrate into spinal cord areas bordered
by an astrocytic scar (Lakatos et al., 2000; Raisman and Li,
2007). Other Hoechst-labeled nuclei without p75-NGFR ex-
pression likely represent the portion of transplanted OEG that
downregulate p75-NGFR expression or a redistribution of
Hoechst dye to host cells (Iwashita et al., 2000). We also de-
termined that ED1-positive macrophages rarely contained
Hoechst-labeled nuclei in OEG-injected rats (Fig. 7D) and
that the distribution of ED1-positive macrophages around the
lesion core was similar in media- and OEG-injected spinal
cords at 8 months after transection. Although Hoechst labeling
alone cannot determine the full extent of OEG survival, double-
labeled p75-NGFR andHoechst profiles suggest that OEG are pres-
ent 8 months after implantation.
Figure 6. OEG transplantation preserves spinal cord tissue (A, B) and neurons (C–F ) around the transection site. A, The
GFAP-negative lesion core and surrounding cavitations (asterisks) weremeasured to estimate the volume of tissue degeneration.
B, Media-injected rats have a larger lesion core and associated cavities than OEG-injected rats (*p  0.05). C, To estimate
injury-induced neuronal degeneration, a sagittal section containing the lesion core of amedia-injected rat was double labeled for
GFAP and NeuN. Neuron-free regions (designated as E) above and below the transection and theminimum distance between the
rostral and caudal stump neurons (arrows, designated as F ) were measured. D, An example of an OEG-injected rat shows that
neurons (red) are foundnear theGFAP (green)-negative lesion core (asterisk).E, Distance between themost proximal neurons and
the lesion border is smaller in OEG thanmedia groups (see E in C; *p 0.001). F, Average distance between neurons in the rostral
and caudal stumps (see F in C) is smaller in OEG- thanmedia-injected rats (*p 0.01). Scale bars: A, C, 400m; D, 50m. Error
bars are SEM.
4306 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
Discussion
OEG facilitated regeneration across the lesion and reorganization
of neural circuits in the caudal stump. Behavioral and electro-
physiological data after complete spinal
cord retransection experiments 8 months
after the initial lesion convincingly dem-
onstrated that the regenerating axons in
OEG-injected rats were functional. After
retransection, noMEPs remained, the de-
creased hypersensitivity to mechanical
stimulation was reversed, and some
OEG-injected rats dramatically im-
proved their locomotor performance.
OEG transplantation combined with step
training facilitated the reorganization of
lumbosacral circuits that contributed to
improved stepping with quipazine and to
the weight-supporting ability of adult spi-
nal rats. OEG transplantation also pre-
served neurons and reduced the volume
of the lesion core, changes that would
facilitate axon regeneration across the
transection. These changes reflect the
combination of spinal circuit reorganiza-
tion and axon regeneration that together
suppressedor facilitatedsensorimotor func-
tion (Fig. 8).
Evidence of caudal stump
reorganization in the recovery of
motor function
Our previous study (Kubasak et al., 2008)
reported that step training alone did not
improve locomotor function of media-
injected adult rats but OEG transplantation
alone improved hindlimb locomotion,
findings confirmed by the current results.
Kubasak et al. (2008) also showed that
OEG-trained rats improved their stepping
ability over time, whereas in the present
study, improvement of plantar stepping
plateaued early. This early improvement
likely represents reorganization within the
caudal stump because there was no electro-
physiological evidence of regeneration at 1
month after transection. Improved plantar
stepping in OEG groups and longer stance
and step trajectories in OEG-trained
compared with OEG-untrained rats
after retransection suggest that OEG
transplantation alone strengthened, and
long-term training further enhanced, func-
tion within the locomotor networks. One
factor that could facilitate locomotion is the
increased frequency of serotonergic and
noradrenergic varicosities apposing the
motor-associated cholinergic neurons in
OEG-injected rats (Takeoka et al., 2009,
2010). Additionally, OEG and step training
improved locomotor performance after
pharmacological activation of 5-HT2A re-
ceptors. Because retransection did not alter
the improved plantar stepping ability of
media- andOEG-trained rats with quipazine, the improvementwas
likely attributable to changes within the caudal stump rather than
axonal regeneration.
Figure 7. OEG identified with anti-p75-NGFR and ED1-labeled macrophages are detected at 8 months after transection. A, B,
Hoechst-labeled nuclei (blue) are foundwithin p75-NGFR-positive cells (red) and suggest the presence of transplantedOEG (white
arrowheads) in the rostral (A) and caudal (B) spinal cord stumps. C, Hoechst-labeled nuclei (blue; white arrowheads) within
p75-NGFR-positive cells (red) in the lesion core are likely OEG but Schwann cells within the transection also express p75-NGFR. D,
Most ED1-labeledmacrophages (red; white arrowheads) do not colocalizewith Hoechst-positive nuclei (blue). Scale bars, 25m.
Figure 8. Summary diagram of how axon regeneration and caudal stump reorganization might contribute to sensorimotor
function. Left, Immediately after a complete transection (approximately T9, curved red line), the lumbar spinal cord (SC) is isolated
from supraspinal and rostral spinal connections.Middle row, At 8months after lesion,media-untrained rats have little evidence of
locomotor recovery (small oval, thin red outline) and hypersensitive hindlimb withdrawal (large oval, thin blue outline). In
OEG-trained rats, direct or indirect connections, i.e., connections including long and short propriospinal neurons, are formed across
the transection that activate or suppress lumbar somatic motor neurons. Functionally, OEG-trained rats have improved locomotor
circuits (small oval, thick red outline) and less sensitive hindlimb withdrawal (small oval, thin blue outline). Right, Although
retransection (approximately T6, straight red line) does not alter locomotor and hindlimb withdrawal functions of media-
untrained rats, OEG-trained rats step better (large oval, thick red outline) and become hypersensitive to mechanical stimulation
(large oval, thin blue outline). Retransection removes the suppression of the sensorimotor function. Corticospinal neurons are light
blue, brainstem projection neurons are dark blue, and spinal interneurons, i.e., long and short propriospinal neurons, are light
purple and black and represent suppression or facilitation of motor functions, respectively. Axons drawn in dotted lines indicate
only anatomical evidence of regeneration. The size of spinal circuits represents the relative contribution to the functional outcome,
and changes in thickness of outlines for locomotor function represent the extent of intraspinal reorganization.
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4307
Evidence of axon regeneration across the transection
Spinal cord retransections provided critical evidence that OEG
transplantation facilitated functionally relevant axon regenera-
tion. Surprisingly, several OEG-injected rats that never plantar
stepped during the 7 monthly kinematics tests dramatically im-
proved their stepping performance after retransection, a result
that suggests that regenerated axons suppressed stepping (Fig. 8).
Both facilitation and suppression of the spinal circuitry are im-
portant in the control of intact locomotion (Bonnot et al., 1998;
Iglesias et al., 2008). It is unclear the extent to which the
regenerated axons are functional, i.e., the net effect is that they
are “inhibitory” to locomotor circuits in the classical neuro-
physiological definition, or dysfunctional in the sense that
they interfere with hindlimb stepping functions. Nonetheless,
axon regeneration appears to have a net suppressive effect on
the locomotor networks and the injury-induced hypersensitive
hindlimb withdrawal in this study. These results emphasize that,
even when axon regeneration is identified electrophysiologi-
cally and anatomically, behavioral consequences may be
unpredictable.
Our electrophysiological results indicate that axons regener-
ate across the transection and form functional connections in
OEG-injected rats, but the process occurred slowly and connec-
tions were less stable than those in intact rats. By 4 months after
transection, we found reconnections with long latencies, features
consistent with polysynaptic and/or slow electrical conduction.
We rarely, and only at 7 months, detected MEPs with latencies
similar to those of intact rats. The small amplitudes of most
MEPs imply that relatively few connections were reestab-
lished. Although intact rats had a 100% frequency of response
to transcranial stimulation, we saw inconsistent responses in
OEG-injected rats, reflecting weak connections established by
regenerating axons.
Combined with electrophysiological data, retrograde trac-
ing results suggest that the re-established projections to so-
matic motor neurons were mainly polysynaptic. For example,
two OEG-injected rats that responded to cortical stimulation
were injected with the retrograde tracer, but neither had
WGA-labeled somata in the motor cortex. Interpreta-
tions consistent with these data are that corticospinal axons
sprouted in the rostral stump and contacted interneurons that
then crossed the transection or that corticospinal axons
crossed the transection site and contacted an interneuron that
eventually projected to somatic motor neurons (Fig. 8). Sim-
ilarly, the brainstem nuclei re-established connections that
were predominantly polysynaptic, and this may explain why
someOEG-injected rats had relatively few retrogradely labeled
cells in the brainstem although MEPs were recorded in their
hindlimb muscles. Alternatively, some regenerated axons
could be electrically silent but able to transport the tracer.
Perhaps some regenerating axons establish nonfunctional or
aberrant connections that then are later eliminated (Bareyre et
al., 2004; Calancie et al., 2005), recapitulating the process of
synapse elimination during development. Additional evidence
consistent with axon regeneration in OEG-injected rats in-
cludes raphespinal axons that spanned the transection and
upregulation of GAP43 in somata that likely represents a re-
sponse to axotomy after retransection. GAP43-positive so-
mata in the caudal stump of OEG-injected rats were located
primarily in lamina V, which contains many ascending sen-
sory neurons (Baker and Giesler, 1984; Menétrey and Bas-
baum, 1987; Villanueva et al., 1991; Ramón-Cueto et al.,
1998). Detailed sensory testing was not performed in this
study, and therefore it is unclear whether these axons have
functional consequences.
Finally, there is an inconsistency between the electrophysio-
logical and anatomical results in long-term media-injected rats.
Although some spurious labeling occurred after WGA–HRP in-
jections, we detected extensive WGA-labeled somata in the red
nucleus of twomedia rats maintained for 8months after transec-
tion but not in 1 month media controls. Chronic media rats also
had several GAP43-positive somata in the caudal stump after
retransection. Because we electrophysiologically and anatomi-
cally confirmed that transections were complete, these results
leave open the possibility that limited spontaneous axon regen-
eration may occur in long-term spinal rats as suggested by
Muñoz-Quiles et al. (2009). In the present study, however, there
was no evidence that spontaneous regeneration contributed to
functional changes. Importantly, the combination of retro-
grade tracer and retransection data caution against the over-
interpretation of anatomical evidence of regeneration and
demonstrate the value of a retransection experiment to deter-
mine whether regenerating axons are functional.
Promotion of axon regeneration and beyond
The current study raises an important question of how OEG
promote axon regeneration after injury. Olfactory bulb-derived
OEG can reduce inhibitory molecules (García-Alías et al., 2004),
alter immune and inflammatory responses (López-Vales et al.,
2004; Chuah et al., 2010), and integrate into the CNS environ-
ment as they intermingle with astrocytes both in vitro and in vivo
(Franklin et al., 1996; Imaizumi et al., 1998; Lakatos et al., 2000,
2003; Raisman and Li, 2007). The present results do not provide
additional insight into the possible mechanisms.
How axon regeneration and the reorganization of spinal neu-
ral circuitrymight contribute to the improvement inmotor func-
tion is complex (Fig. 8). Having now established that mature
regenerating axons can form functionally relevant connections
across a complete spinal cord transection, an important future
challenge is to optimize the extent and balance of axon regener-
ation, maximize functionally useful axon–target reconnections,
and identify strategies to further facilitate functional efficacy.
References
BakerML, Giesler GJ Jr (1984) Anatomical studies of the spinocervical tract
of the rat. Somatosens Res 2:1–18.
Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Raineteau O, Mettenleiter TC, Weinmann
O, Schwab ME (2004) The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a
new intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat Neurosci 7:269–277.
Bonnot A, Corio M, Bouc AM, Viala D (1998) Involvement of AMPA re-
ceptors in posterior locomotor activity in the rabbit: an in vivo study.
J Physiol Paris 92:5–15.
Cai LL, Fong AJ, Otoshi CK, Liang Y, Burdick JW, Roy RR, Edgerton VR
(2006) Implications of assist-as-needed robotic step training after a com-
plete spinal cord injury on intrinsic strategies of motor learning. J Neu-
rosci 26:10564–10568.
Calancie B, Alexeeva N, Broton JG, Molano MR (2005) Interlimb reflex
activity after spinal cord injury in man: strengthening response patterns
are consistent with ongoing synaptic plasticity. Clin Neurophysiol
116:75–86.
Chandler CE, Parsons LM, Hosang M, Shooter EM (1984) A monoclonal
antibody modulates the interaction of nerve growth factor with PC12
cells. J Biol Chem 259:6882–6889.
Chaplan SR, Bach FW, Pogrel JW, Chung JM, Yaksh TL (1994) Quanti-
tative assessment of tactile allodynia in the rat paw. J Neurosci Meth-
ods 53:55–63.
Chuah MI, Hale DM, West AK (2010) Interaction of olfactory ensheathing
cells with other cell types in vitro and after transplantation: glial scars and
inflammation. Exp Neurol. Advance online publication. Retrieved Janu-
ary 24, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.08.012.
4308 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
CôtéMP, Gossard JP (2003) Task-dependent presynaptic inhibition. J Neu-
rosci 23:1886–1893.
Côté MP, Ménard A, Gossard JP (2003) Spinal cats on the treadmill:
changes in load pathways. J Neurosci 23:2789–2796.
Courtine G, Song B, Roy RR, Zhong H, Herrmann JE, Ao Y, Qi J, Edgerton
VR, Sofroniew MV (2008) Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping
via indirect propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat
Med 14:69–74.
Courtine G, Gerasimenko Y, van den Brand R, YewA,Musienko P, ZhongH,
Song B, Ao Y, Ichiyama RM, Lavrov I, Roy RR, Sofroniew MV, Edgerton
VR (2009) Transformation of nonfunctional spinal circuits into func-
tional states after the loss of brain input. Nat Neurosci 12:1333–1342.
de Leon RD, Tamaki H, Hodgson JA, Roy RR, Edgerton VR (1999)
Hindlimb locomotor and postural training modulates glycinergic inhibi-
tion in the spinal cord of the adult spinal cat. J Neurophysiol 82:359–369.
Doster SK, Lozano AM, Aguayo AJ, Willard MB (1991) Expression of the
growth-associated protein GAP-43 in adult rat retinal ganglion cells fol-
lowing axon injury. Neuron 6:635–647.
Edgerton VR, de Leon RD, Tillakaratne N, Recktenwald MR, Hodgson JA,
Roy RR (1997) Use-dependent plasticity in spinal stepping and stand-
ing. Adv Neurol 72:233–247.
Edgerton VR, Tillakaratne NJ, Bigbee AJ, de Leon RD, Roy RR (2004) Plas-
ticity of the spinal neural circuitry after injury. Annu Rev Neurosci
27:145–167.
Efron B, Tibshirani R (1991) Statistical data analysis in the computer age.
Science 253:390–395.
Field P, Li Y, Raisman F (2003) Ensheathment of the olfactory nerves in the
adult rat. J Neurocytol 32:317–324.
Fong AJ, Cai LL, Otoshi CK, Reinkensmeyer DJ, Burdick JW, Roy RR, Edg-
ertonVR (2005) Spinal cord-transectedmice learn to step in response to
quipazine treatment and robotic training. J Neurosci 25:11738–11747.
Fouad K, Schnell L, Bunge MB, Schwab ME, Liebscher T, Pearse DD (2005)
Combining Schwann cell bridges and olfactory-ensheathing glia grafts
with chondroitinase promotes locomotor recovery after complete tran-
section of the spinal cord. J Neurosci 25:1169–1178.
Franklin RJ, Gilson JM, Franceschini IA, Barnett SC (1996) Schwann cell-
like myelination following transplantation of an olfactory bulb-
ensheathing cell line into areas of demyelination in the adult CNS. Glia
17:217–224.
Franssen EH, de Bree FM, Verhaagen J (2007) Olfactory ensheathing glia:
their contribution to primary olfactory nervous system regeneration and
their regenerative potential following transplantation into the injured
spinal cord. Brain Res Rev 56:236–258.
García-Alías G, Verdú E, Forés J, López-Vales R, Navarro X (2003) Func-
tional and electrophysiological characterization of photochemical graded
spinal cord injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma 20:501–510.
García-Alías G, López-Vales R, Forés J, Navarro X, Verdú E (2004) Acute
transplantation of olfactory ensheathing cells or Schwann cells promotes
recovery after spinal cord injury in the rat. J Neurosci Res 75:632–641.
Gerasimenko YP, Ichiyama RM, Lavrov IA, Courtine G, Cai L, Zhong H, Roy
RR, Edgerton VR (2007) Epidural spinal cord stimulation plus quipa-
zine administration enable stepping in complete spinal adult rats. J Neu-
rophysiol 98:2525–2536.
Goslin K, Schreyer DJ, Skene JH, Banker G (1990) Changes in the distribu-
tion of GAP-43 during the development of neuronal polarity. J Neurosci
10:588–602.
Gruner JA, Wade CK, Menna G, Stokes BT (1993) Myoelectric evoked po-
tentials versus locomotor recovery in chronic spinal cord injured rats.
J Neurotrauma 10:327–347.
Ichiyama RM, Gerasimenko YP, Zhong H, Roy RR, Edgerton VR (2005)
Hindlimb steppingmovements in complete spinal rats induced by epidu-
ral spinal cord stimulation. Neurosci Lett 383:339–344.
Ichiyama RM, Courtine G, Gerasimenko YP, Yang GJ, van den Brand R,
Lavrov IA, Zhong H, Roy RR, Edgerton VR (2008) Step training rein-
forces specific spinal locomotor circuitry in adult spinal rats. J Neurosci
28:7370–7375.
Ichiyama R, Potuzak M, Balak M, Kalderon N, Edgerton VR (2009) En-
hanced motor function by training in spinal cord contused rats following
radiation therapy. PLoS One 4:e6862.
Iglesias C, Nielsen JB,Marchand-Pauvert V (2008) Corticospinal inhibition
of transmission in propriospinal-like neurones during human walking.
Eur J Neurosci 28:1351–1361.
Imaizumi T, Lankford KL,Waxman SG, Greer CA, Kocsis JD (1998) Trans-
planted olfactory ensheathing cells remyelinate and enhance axonal con-
duction in the demyelinated dorsal columns of the rat spinal cord.
J Neurosci 18:6176–6185.
Iwashita Y, CrangAJ, BlakemoreWF (2000) Redistribution of bisbenzimide
Hoechst 33342 from transplanted cells to host cells. Neuroreport
11:1013–1016.
Jacobson RD, Virág I, Skene JH (1986) A protein associated with axon
growth, GAP-43, is widely distributed and developmentally regulated in
rat CNS. J Neurosci 6:1843–1855.
Kubasak MD, Jindrich DL, Zhong H, Takeoka A, McFarland KC, Muñoz-
Quiles C, Roy RR, Edgerton VR, Ramón-Cueto A, Phelps PE (2008)
OEG implantation and step training enhance hindlimb-stepping ability
in adult spinal transected rats. Brain 131:264–276.
Lakatos A, Franklin RJ, Barnett SC (2000) Olfactory ensheathing cells and
Schwann cells differ in their in vitro interactions with astrocytes. Glia
32:214–225.
Lakatos A, Barnett SC, Franklin RJ (2003) Olfactory ensheathing cells in-
duce less host astrocyte response and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan
expression than Schwann cells following transplantation into adult CNS
white matter. Exp Neurol 184:237–246.
Lankford KL, Sasaki M, Radtke C, Kocsis JD (2008) Olfactory ensheathing
cells exhibit unique migratory, phagocytic, and myelinating properties in
the X-irradiated spinal cord not shared by Schwann cells. Glia
56:1664–1678.
Li Y, Sauvé Y, Li D, Lund RD, Raisman G (2003) Transplanted olfactory
ensheathing cells promote regeneration of cut adult rat optic nerve axons.
J Neurosci 23:7783–7788.
Li Y, Yamamoto M, Raisman G, Choi D, Carlstedt T (2007) An experimen-
talmodel of ventral root repair showing the beneficial effect of transplant-
ing olfactory ensheathing cells. Neurosurgery 60:734–740; discussion
740–741.
López-Vales R, García-Alías G, Forés J, Vela JM, Navarro X, Verdú E (2004)
Transplanted olfactory ensheathing cells modulate the inflammatory re-
sponse in the injured spinal cord. Neuron Glia Biol 1:201–209.
López-Vales R, Forés J, Verdú E, Navarro X (2006) Acute and delayed trans-
plantation of olfactory ensheathing cells promote partial recovery after
complete transection of the spinal cord. Neurobiol Dis 21:57–68.
Magladery JW, Teasdall RD, Park AM, Languth HW (1952) Electrophysio-
logical studies of reflex activity in patients with lesions of the nervous
system. I. A comparison of spinal motoneurone excitability following
afferent nerve volleys in normal persons and patients with upper motor
neurone lesions. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 91:219–244; passim.
Menétrey D, Basbaum AI (1987) Spinal and trigeminal projections to the
nucleus of the solitary tract: a possible substrate for somatovisceral and
viscerovisceral reflex activation. J Comp Neurol 255:439–450.
Menétrey D, de Pommery J, Roudier F (1985) Propriospinal fibers reaching
the lumbar enlargement in the rat. Neurosci Lett 58:257–261.
Muñoz-Quiles C, Santos-Benito FF, Llamusí MB, Ramón-Cueto A (2009)
Chronic spinal injury repair by olfactory bulb ensheathing glia and feasi-
bility for autologous therapy. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68:1294–1308.
Newton BW, Hamill RW (1988) The morphology and distribution of rat
serotonergic intraspinal neurons: an immunohistochemical study. Brain
Res Bull 20:349–360.
NguyenKB,McCombePA, PenderMP (1994) Macrophage apoptosis in the
central nervous system in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
J Autoimmum 7:145–152.
Pearse DD, Sanchez AR, Pereira FC, Andrade CM, Puzis R, Pressman Y,
Golden K, Kifay BM, Blits B, Wood PM, Bunge MB (2007) Transplan-
tation of Schwann cells and/or olfactory ensheathing glia into the con-
tused spinal cord: survival, migration, axon association, and fundamental
recovery. Glia 55:976–1000.
Protas DT, Brown BG, Jung R, Jindrich DL (2008) Selective neurotransmit-
ter blockers affect motor evoked potentials in anesthetized rats. Soc Neu-
rosci Abstr 34:74.7.
Raisman G, Li Y (2007) Repair of neural pathways by olfactory ensheathing
cells. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:312–319.
Raivich G, Jones LL, Kloss CU, Werner A, Neumann H, Kreutzberg GW
(1998) Immune surveillance in the injured nervous system:
T-lymphocytes invade the axotomized mouse facial motor nucleus
and aggregate around sites of neuronal degeneration. J Neurosci
18:5804–5816.
Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 • 4309
Ramón-Cueto A, Plant GW, Avila J, Bunge MB (1998) Long-distance ax-
onal regeneration in the transected adult rat spinal cord is promoted by
olfactory ensheathing glia transplants. J Neurosci 18:3803–3815.
Ramón-Cueto A, Cordero MI, Santos-Benito FF, Avila J (2000) Functional
recovery of paraplegic rats and motor axon regeneration in their spinal
cords by olfactory ensheathing glia. Neuron 25:425–435.
Reese NB, Skinner RD, Mitchell D, Yates C, Barnes CN, Kiser TS, Garcia-Rill
E (2006) Restoration of frequency-dependent depression of the
H-reflex by passive exercise in spinal rats. Spinal Cord 44:28–34.
Rossignol S, Giroux N, Chau C, Marcoux J, Brustein E, Reader TA (2001)
Pharmacological aids to locomotor training after spinal injury in the cat.
J Physiol 533:65–74.
SasakiM, Lankford KL, ZemedkunM, Kocsis JD (2004) Identified olfactory
ensheating cells transplanted into the transected dorsal funiculus bridge
the lesion and form myelin. J Neurosci 24:8485–8493.
Schreyer DJ, Skene JH (1991) Fate of GAP-43 in ascending spinal axons of
DRG neurons after peripheral nerve injury: delayed accumulation and
correlation with regenerative potential. J Neurosci 11:3738–3751.
Siebert JR, Middelton FA, Stelzner DJ (2010) Intrinsic response of thoracic
propriospinal neurons to axotomy. BMC Neuroscience 11:69.
Smithson LJ, Kawaja MD (2010) Microglial/macrophage cells in mamma-
lian olfactory nerve fascicles. J Neurosci Res 88:858–865.
Takeoka A, KubasakMD, ZhongH, Roy RR, Phelps PE (2009) Serotonergic
innervation of the caudal spinal stump in rats after complete spinal tran-
section: effect of olfactory ensheathing glia. J CompNeurol 515:664–676.
Takeoka A, Kubasak MD, Zhong H, Kaplan J, Roy RR, Phelps PE (2010)
Noradrenergic innervation of the rat spinal cord caudal to a complete
spinal cord transection: effects of olfactory ensheathing glia. Exp Neurol
222:59–69.
Tillakaratne NJ, Mouria M, Ziv NB, Roy RR, Edgerton VR, Tobin AJ (2000)
Increased expression of glutamate decarboxylase (GAD67) in feline lum-
bar spinal cord after complete thoracic spinal cord transection. J Neurosci
Res 60:219–230.
Tillakaratne NJ, de Leon RD, Hoang TX, Roy RR, Edgerton VR, Tobin AJ
(2002) Use-dependent modulation of inhibitory capacity in the feline
lumbar spinal cord. J Neurosci 22:3130–3143.
Timoszyk WK, De Leon RD, London N, Roy RR, Edgerton VR, Reinkens-
meyerDJ (2002) The rat lumbosacral spinal cord adapts to robotic load-
ing applied during stance. J Neurophysiol 88:3108–3117.
Villanueva L, de Pommery J, Menétrey D, Le Bars D (1991) Spinal afferent
projections to subnucleus reticularis dorsalis in the rat. Neurosci Lett
134:98–102.
Zemlan FP, Kow LM, Pfaff DW (1984) Analgesia after lesions of nucleus
reticularismagnocellularis: differential effect on supraspinal versus spinal
pain reflexes. Pain 18:221–237.
4310 • J. Neurosci., March 16, 2011 • 31(11):4298–4310 Takeoka et al. • Functional Regeneration after OEG Transplants
