Spinal Cord Regeneration in a Tail Autotomizing Urodele
Ellen M. Dawley,* Shoji O. Samson, Kenton T. Woodard, and Kathryn A. Matthias
Department of Biology, Ursinus College, Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426
ABSTRACT Adult urodele amphibians possess exten-
sive regenerative abilities, including lens, jaws, limbs,
and tails. In this study, we examined the cellular events
and time course of spinal cord regeneration in a species,
Plethodon cinereus, that has the ability to autotomize its
tail as an antipredator strategy. We propose that this
species may have enhanced regenerative abilities as fur-
ther coadaptations with this antipredator strategy. We
examined the expression of nestin, vimentin, and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) after autotomy as markers
of neural precursor cells and astroglia; we also traced the
appearance of new neurons using 5-bromo-20-deoxyuri-
dine/neuronal nuclei (BrdU/NeuN) double labeling. As
expected, the regenerating ependymal tube was a major
source of new neurons; however, the spinal cord cranial to
the plane of autotomy showed significant mitotic activity,
more extensive than what is reported for other urodeles
that cannot autotomize their tails. In addition, this spe-
cies shows upregulation of nestin, vimentin, and GFAP
within days after tail autotomy; further, this expression is
upregulated within the spinal cord cranial to the plane of
autotomy, not just within the extending ependymal tube,
as reported in other urodeles. We suggest that enhanced
survival of the spinal cord cranial to autotomy allows this
portion to participate in the enhanced recovery and regen-
eration of the spinal cord. J. Morphol. 273:211–225,
2012.  2011Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
KEY WORDS: spinal cord; regeneration; tail; autotomy
INTRODUCTION
Adult urodele amphibians possess extensive abil-
ities to regenerate complex structures, including
lens, jaws, limbs, and tails (Chernoff et al., 2003;
Del Rio-Tsonis and Tsonis, 2003; Nye et al., 2003).
In the case of tail regeneration, muscles, vertebral
column, and spinal cord regenerate, which is per-
haps linked to the unlimited growth potential of
their tails (Holder and Clarke, 1988; Benraiss
et al., 1999). In this study, we examined the cellular
events and time course of spinal cord regeneration
in a urodele species, Plethodon cinereus, that has
the ability to autotomize its tail as an antipredator
strategy. Many salamanders in the family Pletho-
dontidae possess a unique suite of adaptations that
allow them to detach their tails (autotomy; Wake
and Dresner, 1967) and facilitate regeneration.
When autotomized versus amputated tail wound
healing and regeneration were compared using P.
cinereus, all steps in these processes began and
were completed sooner in autotomized tails (Din-
smore, 1977). All other spinal cord regeneration
studies in urodeles have been done on species that
cannot autotomize their tails; we expect that P. cin-
ereus and other autotomizing species may have
enhanced regenerative abilities as a coadaptation
with this antipredator strategy.
The frequent presence of mitotic figures in the
regenerating ependymal tube (Egar and Sinder,
1972; Iten and Bryant, 1976; Dinsmore, 1977; Chern-
off et al., 2003) and studies using 5-bromo-20-deoxy-
uridine (BrdU) to label mitotic cells in the
ependymal tube (Benraiss et al., 1999; Ferretti et al.,
2003) provide strong evidence that the radial ependy-
mal cells forming the caudally extending ependymal
tube divide and are the source of new neurons. Thus,
the ependymal cells lining the central canal of uro-
dele spinal cords appear to retain characteristics of
embryonic radial glial cells. In addition, neurons
from the intact spinal cord stump can migrate into
the regenerate (Zhang et al., 2003). We predict that
regeneration may commence more rapidly in
P. cinereus than in these other urodele species
because wound healing and cleanup commence more
rapidly. We used double label experiments with anti-
BrdU and anti-neuronal nuclei (NeuN, a reliable
immunocytochemical marker for postmitotic neurons,
Mullen et al., 1992) to locate and trace the appear-
ance of new cells and their progression to expression
of NeuN as postmitotic neurons.
Because adult neural stem cells are thought
to express or re-express intermediate filament
Shoji O. Samson is currently at Touro College of Osteopathic
Medicine, New York, NY.
Kenton T. Woodard is currently at University of North Carolina,
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
Kathryn A. Matthias is currently at Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA.
Contract grant sponsor: Ursinus College, HHMI, and Merck.
*Correspondence to: Ellen M. Dawley, Department of Biology,
Ursinus College, Collegeville, PA 19426.
E-mail: edawley@ursinus.edu
Received 26 December 2010; Revised 29 July 2011;
Accepted 12 August 2011
Published online 28 September 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)
DOI: 10.1002/jmor.11019
JOURNAL OF MORPHOLOGY 273:211–225 (2012)
 2011 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.
proteins in a pattern that mirrors embryonic devel-
opment (Hockfield and McKay, 1985; Fredericksen
and McKay, 1988; Wiese et al., 2004; Kempermann,
2006), an approach to documenting precursor cell
activity is to characterize the timing and location of
different intermediate filament proteins. We exam-
ined the expression of nestin, vimentin, and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in P. cinereus intact
and regenerating spinal cords at specific time
points soon after induced tail autotomy. Nestin is
abundant in early neuroepithelial and other embry-
onic and fetal cells; after differentiation into neural,
pancreatic or hepatic cell lineages, nestin is down-
regulated, and, in the case of neurons, neurofila-
ment proteins are upregulated, although the two
proteins are briefly coexpressed. Nestin also is
expressed in radial glia throughout the develop-
ment of the central nervous system (CNS) (Hock-
field and McKay, 1985). Nestin positive cells are
found in some adult mammalian neural tissues
that are radial glial-like, meaning that they are ca-
pable of cell division, differentiation, and migration
(Doetsch et al., 1999; Doyle et al., 2001; Fukuda
et al., 2003) and nestin is re-expressed after injury
(Namiki and Tator, 1999). Thus, nestin is often
used as a neural precursor cell marker (Kemper-
mann, 2006).
Vimentin, another intermediate filament protein,
also is expressed in neuroepithelial cells before dif-
ferentiation (Tapscott et al., 1981; Cochard and
Paulin, 1984; Fredericksen and McKay, 1988), con-
currently (Fredericksen and McKay, 1988; Tohyama
et al., 1992) and possibly after (Doyle et al., 2001)
nestin expression. Similar to nestin, following early
embryonic development, vimentin is for a period
coexpressed with neurofilament proteins in some
young neurons, but then disappears in mature neu-
rons (Cochard and Paulin, 1984). During develop-
ment, vimentin also is expressed in radial glial
fibers (Shaw et al., 1981; Tapscott et al., 1981;
Tohyama et al., 1992) and immature astrocytes
(Eng and Lee, 1995); in adults, vimentin is
expressed in ependymal cell bodies, tanycyte proc-
esses (Shaw et al., 1981), and Bergmann glial proc-
esses (Shaw et al., 1981). It is expressed in high
levels in all portions of adult olfactory neurons
(Schwob et al., 1986); because olfactory receptor
neurons rarely express neurofilament proteins,
Schwob et al. (1986) interpreted this expression
pattern to be a failure of olfactory receptor neurons
to switch to an adult intermediate protein composi-
tion and a retention of a more juvenile stage.
The third intermediate filament protein of inter-
est is GFAP, which is expressed in radial glia at
later developmental stages than that of the ear-
liest expressions of nestin and vimentin (Tohyama
et al., 1992). GFAP-positive processes of astrocytes
are prevalent throughout the entire adult brain
(Shaw et al., 1981; Tapscott et al., 1981), and some
of these processes are also vimentin positive,
although GFAP has a much wider distribution
than vimentin, mostly replacing vimentin as astro-
cytes mature (Dahl, 1981; Eng and Lee, 1995).
GFAP is traditionally said to be found in adult
cells of the astroglial lineage, including differenti-
ated astrocytes (Eng and Lee, 1995) and radial
glia-like cells in the same adult mammalian neuro-
genic zones mentioned above that express nestin
(Doetsch et al., 1997; Seri et al., 2001).
In the nonautotomizing urodele species that
have been studied (Ambystoma mexicanum, Pleu-
rodeles waltl, Nothophthalmus viridescens, Tritu-
rus carnifex, and Salamandra salamandra), GFAP
expression was most often examined, vimentin
expression was examined in many, and nestin
expression was examined rarely. Unfortunately, no
clear trends of expression of intermediate filament
proteins in urodeles have emerged. For example,
in most species, GFAP is most strongly expressed
in the radiating and branching processes of radial
glia, although some reported light expression in
ependymal cell bodies, and one species appears to
express no GFAP (Zamora and Mutin, 1988; Nau-
joks-Manteuffel and Roth, 1989; Holder et al.,
1990; Arsanto et al., 1992; O’Hara et al., 1992;
Lazzari et al., 1997; Walder et al., 2003). After tail
amputation, GFAP immunoreactivity was reported
either to have disappeared for several weeks in
the regenerate (O’Hara et al., 1992) or to be upreg-
ulated in ependymal cells and their processes after
a brief period when expression is lost (Walder
et al., 2003). We have sought to present a coherent
picture of the expression of these intermediate fila-
ment proteins in P. cinereus for comparison to
other urodeles and to other vertebrates; we expect
that the regenerating ependymal tube will express
nestin first, then vimentin, and, finally, GFAP.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
P. cinereus, completely terrestrial salamanders, were collected
in forests in Montgomery County, PA, and returned to specific
collection sites after experimentation. They were housed at
Ursinus College, where all work was carried out between 2005
and 2010, singly or in pairs in containers with moist filter
paper at 148C in a 12-h dark/12-h light cycle and fed Drosophila
ad libitum. A salamander was forced to autotomize the distal
10 cm of the tail tip when the tail was gripped with forceps at
10 cm and the animal twisted its body to escape. After a specific
number of days, the tail stump was reamputated and the entire
tail processed as described below. The Ursinus College IACUC
approved all care and procedures (Protocol #2004-2C).
For general morphology, tail stumps (n 5 5) were immersion
fixed overnight in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 mol l21 phosphate
buffer (PB), rinsed in PB, and decalcified in 0.1 mol l21 ethylene-
diaminetetraacetic acid for 4 days. They were postfixed in 2% os-
mium tetroxide for 1 h, brought through a series of ethanols of
increasing concentration, and embedded in Poly/Bed-Araldite (Elec-
tron Microscopy Services). Tails were cut transversely with glass
knives on a rotary microtome at a thickness of 0.5 lm. Sections
were mounted on a slide and stained with 1% toluidine blue.
We used BrdU to birth date ependymal cells. Salamanders
were injected intraperitoneally five times, at 1 h intervals, with
212 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
BrdU (0.050 mg/g body weight; Sigma) 3 or 6 days after tail
autotomy. Tail stumps were reamputated 1 day to 3 weeks after
BrdU injection (n 5 10–20 for each time point). Controls
consisted of salamanders (n 5 5) injected with BrdU without
tail autotomy; the distal one-third of tails then were amputated
1 day after BrdU injection.
For all immunohistological procedures, tail stumps were
immersion fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde, rinsed in
PB, and cryoprotected overnight in 30% sucrose. Tail stumps
were frozen sectioned at 10–12 lm, and each section was col-
lected on Fisher Superfrost slides or slides treated with Biobond
(Electron Microscopy Services). A minimum of five slides, with
10–15 serial sections on each slide, were collected, which always
resulted in sections that spanned from caudal-most regenerat-
ing tail into more cranial sections with intact spinal cord. Slides
were dried overnight at 458C and then stored in the freezer
until further processing. When ready to proceed further, slides
were first warmed for 1–2 h, rinsed in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS), then brought through a series of ethanols (70, 95,
100, 95, and 70%) and back to PBS. To localize cells that incor-
porated BrdU, sections were incubated in 1 N HCl for 10 min
at room temperature, then in 2 N HCl for 30 min at 378C, and
neutralized in 0.1 mol l21 borate buffer (pH 8.5) for 5 min,
followed by rinsing in PBS. After blocking (10% normal goat
serum, 4% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 5% nonfat dry milk,
0.2% Triton X-100, and 0.0004% sodium azide in PBS) for
30 min, slides were incubated in a cocktail of primary antibod-
ies (rat anti-BrdU diluted 1:100, Accurate Chemicals; mouse
anti-NeuN diluted 1:250, Millipore) for 3 days at room tempera-
ture. After rinsing in BSA wash (4% BSA, 5% nonfat dry milk
in PBS), slides were then incubated for 3 days at room tempera-
ture in a cocktail of secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti-rat and Alexa Fluor goat anti-mouse, both diluted 1:500;
Invitrogen), followed by washes in BSA wash and PBS, and cov-
erslipped with Fluoromount (Electron Microscopy Services). For
nestin and vimentin double labeling, tail stumps were reampu-
tated 2–21 days after autotomy (n 5 10–20 for each time point).
Nestin/vimentin controls (n 5 6) were the distal one-third of
tails without prior autotomy. A similar tissue and slide process-
ing procedure was followed as for the BrdU/NeuN double label-
ing, minus the incubation with HCl and borate buffer, such that
following the ethanol series, slides were blocked for 20 min and
then incubated in primary antibodies (mouse antinestin, diluted
1:50, Millipore; rabbit antivimentin, 1 lg/ml, Abcam) for 1.5 h
at room temperature. After rinsing in BSA wash, slides were
incubated in secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 546 goat anti-
mouse and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit, 1:500 dilution) for
1 h at room temperature, rinsed in PBS, incubated for 4.5 min
in Hoechst (1:500 dilution; Sigma Chemicals), rinsed in PBS
and then distilled water, and coverslipped in Fluoromount. For
GFAP and NeuN double labeling, tail stumps were reamputated
3–66 days after autotomy (n 5 5 for each time point) and
controls (n 5 5) were the distal one-third of tails without prior
autotomy; a similar procedure was followed as for nestin/vimen-
tin double labeling, but the primary antibodies consisted of rab-
bit anti-GFAP (diluted 1:500; Dako) and mouse anti-NeuN
(diluted 1:500; Millipore), secondary antibodies were Alexa
Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit and Alexa Fluor 546 goat anti-mouse,
followed by Hoeschst. Negative controls for all treatments
consisted of the same steps described above, but the primary
antibody was omitted; in all cases, omission of primary antibody
resulted in no labeling. Sections were examined with a confocal
microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i) and photographed (Nikon
D-Eclipse C1 camera).
RESULTS
Anatomy
The spinal cord in a normal (not regenerating)
tail extended nearly to the tip of the tail and
consisted of a double layer of cells surrounding an
enlarged central canal without an obvious periph-
eral neuropil layer (Fig. 1A). Proceeding cranially,
the number of cells within the gray matter gradu-
ally increased, particularly in the dorsal part of
the cord, as did the thickness of the white matter
and density of neuropil within the white matter
(Fig. 1B–F). In addition, the diameter of the cen-
tral canal decreased and the shape of the spinal
cord changed when moving cranially; the spinal
cord became progressively rounder (Fig. 1D), then
rhomboidal in shape (Fig. 1E), and finally some-
what compressed dorsoventrally (Fig. 1F), and
remained that shape throughout the rest of the
tail. One day after tail autotomy, no portion of a
spinal cord was visible in tissue at the distal-most
tip of the tail stump, but within 50–75 lm
cranially, a remnant of the spinal cord appeared,
composed mostly of acellular material (Fig. 2A).
Moving another 75 lm cranially, the spinal cord
appeared intact. One week after tail autotomy,
remnants of a damaged spinal cord were still
likely to be present at the distal end of the tail
(Fig. 2B), rather than a simple ependymal tube,
and the spinal cord remnant became progressively
more complete in a cranial direction (Fig. 2C,D).
This spinal cord remnant was composed of an
enlarged central canal surrounded by an ependy-
mal layer and more peripheral round cell bodies,
which were NeuN-ir (Fig. 12). More peripherally
yet, the surrounding white matter was disrupted,
clearly lacking the dense neuropil of a normal
spinal cord (Fig. 1D–F). Two weeks after tail autot-
omy, a growing ependymal tube (Fig. 2E) was reli-
ably found at the distal tail tip, 5 lm cranial to
the blastema; continuing cranially, the ependymal
tube gradually transitioned into an intact spinal
cord in another 90 lm.
BrdU
Spinal cord sections sampled along the distal
one-third of control salamanders rarely contained
BrdU-immunoreactive cells. In experimental speci-
mens injected with BrdU 3 days after tail autot-
omy, an ependymal tube had not yet formed and
the distal end of the spinal cord showed extensive
damage. However, even in the remaining damaged
spinal cord, BrdU-ir cells were scattered along its
length, mainly in the ependymal layer, from the
distal-most recognizable end to as far proximally
as was sectioned. Thus, sections that contained
labeled cells ranged from a spinal cord remnant
with few cells (Fig. 3A) to sections that appeared
to be complete and undamaged (Fig. 3B). In one
specimen, there was, on average, one BrdU-ir cell
per 12-lm-thick section for 15 sections (185 lm),
although in other specimens there were no BrdU-
ir cells in the spinal cord at all. In specimens
4 days after BrdU injection (which makes it 7 days
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 213
Journal of Morphology
after autotomy), some BrdU-ir cells were periph-
eral to the ependymal layer.
BrdU injection at 6 days postautotomy was far
more likely to label ependymal cells, and in some
specimens nearly every ependymal cell in the ep-
endymal tube was BrdU-ir (Fig. 4A), although in
some specimens only some, often less than 1/2 of
the ependymal tube cells, were BrdU-ir. In some
cases, the ependymal layer continued to be labeled
throughout the length of the sectioned regenerate
(Fig. 4B–D), well into what seemed to be undam-
aged and unregenerated spinal cord (Fig. 4D); in
this specimen, BrdU-ir ependymal cells were
present along the entire 450-lm tail that was
sectioned. In addition, some cells peripheral to the
ependyma were BrdU-ir, and often these cells were
dorsal to the central canal (Fig. 4C). This occurred
in specimens 1 day after BrdU injection (Fig. 4) as
well as all other treatments (2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 15, and
23 days post-BrdU injection), and BrdU-ir cells
remained in the ependymal layer in all treat-
ments. The distribution of BrdU-ir cells along the
distal spinal cord varied among specimens, such
that in some cases, there were more labeled epen-
dymal cells in proximal sections than in the distal
ependymal tube, yet in other cases, the more distal
tip had many BrdU-ir cells even 15 days post-
BrdU injection. However, the BrdU-ir in this speci-
men was mostly punctate (lesser in intensity) than
in specimens with shorter periods of time between
BrdU injection and reamputation, except in more
proximal sections where the BrdU-ir was intense.
Fig. 1. Semithin sections of a normal (not regenerating) spinal cord stained with toluidine
blue. A: The distal most tip of the spinal cord in place within the tail. B–F: Progressively more
cranial sections, with F representing the spinal cord condition throughout the rest of the tail. cc,
central canal; e, epidermis; and n, notochord; scale lines 5 25 lm.
214 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
In specimens that had regenerated the longest (29
days postautotomy and 23 days post-BrdU injec-
tion), BrdU-ir cells were not present in the distal
tip, but along a discreet length of the cord. For
example, diffuse BrdU-ir was present distally at
the stage when the spinal cord was already three
layers thick, as the cord differentiated to contain
neurons, until a level at which the spinal cord was
nearly repopulated. This label was often, but not
always, punctuate.
NeuN (and NeuN plus BrdU)
NeuN-ir cells colabeled with BrdU were present
in the ependymal layer (Fig. 5A,B) and more
peripherally (Fig. 5C,D) 1 day after BrdU injec-
tion, although this NeuN-ir was faint. However,
not all BrdU-ir cells were also NeuN-ir. The inten-
sity of the NeuN immunofluorescence varied
within the same specimen and even within the
same section, as did the size of the NeuN-ir cell
bodies, although the intensity was always light
within cells in the ependymal layer (Fig. 5D,E). In
intact cranial sections, NeuN-ir was not detectable
in ependymal cells, although the majority of perie-
pendymal cells were NeuN-ir (Fig. 5F). NeuN-ir
also was variably present within the processes of
neurons within the white matter (Fig. 6A,B),
sometimes at a greater intensity than within the
nucleus (Fig. 6B), although this was only true in
more cranial sections with intact spinal cords. In
specimens that had been regenerating for longer
periods of time (33 days), it was possible to trace
the orderly progression from elongate ependymal
Fig. 2. Semithin sections of regenerating spinal cords stained with toluidine blue. A: Distal tip of entire regenerating tail 1 day
after tail autotomy. The largely acellular area directly dorsal to the notochord (n) is the damaged spinal cord (sc). The skin is miss-
ing dorsally, but complete with skin glands ventrally. B: Distal end of spinal cord 1 week after tail autotomy; an asterisk marks
where the central canal would be located. C and D: Same tail as B, at progressively more cranial positions; cc, central canal. E: Ep-
endymal tube of regenerating spinal cord 2 weeks after tail autotomy; scale lines 5 50 lm.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 215
Journal of Morphology
cells to more peripheral, round, NeuN-ir cells (Fig.
5E,F). By 8 days after autotomy, when a growing
ependymal tube was recognizable and remnants of
the damaged cord were still present, NeuN-ir cells
were located caudal to the ependymal tube (Fig.
7A) and even some distance from it (Fig. 7B). In
slightly more proximal sections (Fig. 7C), NeuN-ir
cells were adjacent to the ependymal layer. Even
more proximally, NeuN-ir was also seen in the
growing white matter as NeuN-ir cells continued
to be added to the spinal cord (Fig. 7D). Some-
times, it was possible to identify a BrdU-ir cell
that did not express NeuN and was oval in shape
in both 3-day and 6-day BrdU injected salaman-
ders. These could be macroglial cells rather than
neurons. In comparison, NeuN-ir cells, which are
neurons, are round.
Nestin/Vimentin
Nestin and vimentin immunoreactivity were
considered together in double label experiments.
Spinal cord sections sampled along the distal 1/3
of control salamanders only showed light vimen-
tin/nestin immunoreactivity in very distal sections.
Vimentin-ir cells were detected earlier than nes-
tin-ir cells in the distal end of spinal cords, 2–4
days after tail autotomy; vimentin-ir ependymal
cells were present in the distal damaged spinal
cord as the ependymal tube had not yet formed
(Fig. 8A). More proximally, yet still within the part
of the spinal cord affected by the autotomy (not a
complete complement of cells within the gray mat-
ter), there was abundant nestin immunoreactivity
within the white matter of the spinal cord, often
adjacent to cell bodies and often colocalized
(yellow) with vimentin immunoreactivity, although
this reactivity was not as intense as the nestin im-
munoreactivity (Fig. 8B–D). These were not radial
fibers. Even more proximally, at the stage where
the spinal cord appeared complete (possessed what
looked like complete complement of cells), many
cell bodies peripheral to the ependymal layer and
within the gray matter were vimentin-ir, in addi-
tion to the nestin and vimentin white matter im-
munoreactivity (Fig. 9). Intense vimentin-ir radial
fibers were present ventrolaterally (Fig. 9B). By 5
days postautotomy, nestin immunoreactivity could
often be found along with vimentin immunoreac-
tivity in ependymal cells (Fig. 10A; yellow is dou-
ble label), although vimentin-ir was more intense
in these cells. In more proximal sections (Fig.
10B), vimentin-ir was more intense than nestin-ir
in the ependyma, but both were intense in the
white matter. By 14 days postautotomy, the epen-
dymal tube extending posteriorly was both nestin
and vimentin immunoreactive, particularly within
the developing white matter (Fig. 11A), but proxi-
mally cells in the peripheral gray matter expressed
mainly vimentin (Fig. 11B) and little nestin, even
though this portion of the spinal cord was still
mitotically active (Fig. 11C). By 21 days postautot-
omy, some vimentin-ir cells were still evident in
the peripheral gray matter. Spinal cord sections
sampled along the distal one-third of control sala-
manders only showed light vimentin/nestin-immu-
noreactivity in very distal sections, similar to that
pictured in Figure 11A.
GFAP
GFAP immunofluorescence in normal spinal
cords was evident in the branching processes and
the endfeet within the white matter (Fig. 12A),
Fig. 3. Spinal cords injected with BrdU 3 days after tail autotomy, double labeled with anti-BrdU and anti-NeuN. A: Distal spi-
nal cord remnant with enlarged central canal (cc). B: More cranial, more complete-looking spinal cord remnant without enlarged
central canal. BrdU-immunoreactivity is green and NeuN-immunoreactivity is red; scale line 5 20 lm.
216 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
but not the cell bodies of cells in the ependymal
layer, although more peripheral cell bodies within
the gray matter occasionally seemed to be GFAP-
ir. At the distal end of the regenerating spinal
cord, white matter processes and endfeet remained
GFAP-immunoreactive in the early stages of
regeneration (e.g., 5 days postautotomy) even
though damage was still evident and an ependy-
mal tube had not yet emerged (Fig. 12B). Once an
ependymal tube was recognizable distally (e.g., 2
weeks), GFAP-ir was intense in individual cell
bodies, particularly those that appeared to be
undergoing mitosis, and in many processes (Fig.
12C), and, more cranially, in cells of the ependy-
mal layer (Fig. 12D,E) and the periependymal
gray matter (Fig. 12E,F). In all days postautotomy,
in the intact (possibly never regenerated) portion
of the tail, long, thick fibers radiated from cells in
the gray matter or lining the central canal and
extended to the meningeal surface (Fig. 13); this
label was always more intense than in normal,
nonautotomized tails (Fig. 12A). In the oldest
regenerating spinal cords (66 days after autotomi-
zation), at the distal end, GFAP immunofluores-
cence was intense in the cytoplasm of ependymal
cells and in the growing white matter (Fig. 14A);
GFAP immunofluorescence continued to be
intensely expressed in the expanding white matter
in more cranial sections (Fig. 14B,C).
DISCUSSION
BrdU/NeuN Results
Perhaps the most significant conclusion from
these BrdU experiments in P. cinereus is that mi-
tosis is not restricted to the growing ependymal
tube, but also occurs in the distal end of the
remaining spinal cord, which was at varying
Fig. 4. Spinal cords injected with BrdU 6 days after tail autotomy, double labeled with anti-BrdU and anti-NeuN and reampu-
tated 1 day after injection. A. Ependymal tube of regenerating spinal cord. B–D: Progressively more cranial, more complete-looking
spinal cord remnants from the same animal. BrdU-immunoreactivity is green and NeuN-immunoreactivity is red; cc, central canal;
scale line 5 50 lm.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 217
Journal of Morphology
Fig. 5. Distribution and intensity of expression of NeuN-immunoreactivity. A and B: BrdU–NeuN double labeling 1 day after
BrdU injection in a distal regenerate. C and D: BrdU–NeuN double labeling 1 day after BrdU injection in a more cranial section.
E: NeuN-immunoreactivity in a 33-day regenerate. F: NeuN-immunoreactivity in a far cranial, intact section. BrdU-immunoreac-
tivity is green and NeuN-immunoreactivity is red; cc, central canal; scale line 5 50 lm.
Fig. 6. Distribution and intensity of NeuN-immunoreactivity within the white matter. A:
Light intensity with the white matter. B: Dark intensity within the white matter. NeuN-immu-
noreactivity is red; cc, central canal; scale line 5 25 lm.
218 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
stages of damage, including sections that look com-
pletely undamaged and unregenerated. Thus, mi-
totic activity is upregulated even within the
undamaged spinal cord. Sometimes these BrdU-ir
cells are found peripheral to the ependyma as
early as 1 day after BrdU injection, but they also
remained in the ependyma even 23 days post-
BrdU injection. In these latter, older regenerates,
BrdU immunofluorescence was punctate most dis-
tally, perhaps indicating ependymal cells that had
continued mitosis as the tube grew distally; how-
ever, some ependymal cells located more proxi-
mally in these long-term regenerates retained an
intense BrdU immunofluorescence, perhaps indi-
cating a cell that had not undergone any further
mitosis and remained in place. In other urodele
species that have been studied, all of which are
incapable of tail autotomy, BrdU-ir cells were
found in both the terminal vesicle and along the
regenerating ependymal tube (Benraiss et al.,
1997, 1999; Ferretti et al., 2003). However, these
studies examined only the growing ependymal
tube in 2- or 3-week regenerates and report the
events of neither early regeneration nor the more
proximal partial or completely intact spinal cord.
A histological study of regeneration in N. virides-
cens showed mitosis in the growing ependymal
tube as early as 5 days postamputation, although
there was a substantial wound epidermis contain-
ing dead cells and tissue debris that was not
cleared out until 10–15 days postamputation (Iten
and Bryant, 1976). In our study, we document that
mitosis is detectable in P. cinereus 3 days postau-
totomy within the ependymal tube and the undam-
aged spinal cord. More recently, Mchedlishvili
et al. (2007) grafted green fluorescent protein-posi-
tive spinal cord portions onto recipient larval axo-
lotl tails that had equivalent lengths of spinal cord
removed. After a 7-day healing period, these tails
were amputated and imaged over several days to
reveal that a 500-lm region adjacent to the ampu-
tation plane generated the neural progenitors for
regeneration. Similarly, 7 days after autotomy we
identified a region of 400–500 lm cranial to the
amputation plane that incorporated BrdU in
P. cinereus. The wound healing of plethodontid
salamanders results in tissues anterior to the myo-
septum being only slightly disturbed, and even at
Fig. 7. Position of NeuN-ir cells in relation to the growing ependymal tube 8 days after autot-
omy. A: Caudal to the ependymal tube. B: At the level of the ependymal tube. C and D: Progres-
sively more cranial to the ependymal tube. BrdU-immunoreactivity is green and NeuN-immuno-
reactivity is red; cc, central canal; scale line 5 30 lm.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 219
Journal of Morphology
2-day postautotomy, the spinal cord one to two
cells proximal to the stump surface are histologi-
cally undisturbed (Dinsmore, 1977). This adapta-
tion may mean that the distal spinal cord that is
proximal to the regenerating ependymal tube is
more likely, or more quickly, to participate in the
events of regeneration, as was seen in our study.
Comparisons of BrdU incorporation in other spe-
Fig. 8. Expression of nestin and vimentin in a spinal cord 2 days after autotomy. A: Distal section, close to the plane of autot-
omy; white arrows point to vimentin-immunoreactivity in the ependymal layer. B–D: More cranial section showing (B) combined
nestin–vimentin immunoreactivity, white arrows point to large areas of nestin–vimentin colocalization adjacent to a nucleus, (C)
vimentin-immunoreactivity alone, and (D) nestin-immunoreactivity alone. Vimentin-immunoreactivity is green; nestin-immunoreac-
tivity is red; vimentin–nestin coexpression is yellow; and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central canal; scale line 5 15 lm.
Fig. 9. Nestin and vimentin-immunoreactivity in a cranial, undamaged portion of the spinal cord 4 days after autotomy. A:
Strong vimentin-ir in cell bodies. B: Strong vimentin-ir radial fibers. Vimentin-immunoreactivity is green; nestin-immunoreactivity
is red; vimentin–nestin coexpression is yellow; and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central canal; scale line 5 15 lm.
220 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
cies of urodeles, including larval stages, are
needed to confirm this possibility.
NeuN is often used as a marker for mature neu-
rons (e.g., Horner et al., 2000), although neither
the definition of ‘‘mature’’ is always clearly defined
nor the function of the NeuN protein is known. In
the developing mammalian nervous system, NeuN
is expressed in postmitotic neurons that are ini-
tiating cellular and morphological differentiation
(Mullen et al., 1992). In the adult mammalian hip-
pocampus, a few NeuN/BrdU positive cells can be
found 1 day after BrdU injection, and this number
increases considerably after 3 days (Kempermann,
2006). Similarly, we detected ependymal cells coex-
pressing BrdU-ir and NeuN-ir 1 day after BrdU
injection in P. cinereus. These cells began to
express NeuN even as they remained within the
ependymal layer, although this expression was
quite light.
In P. cinereus, there was a great deal of varia-
tion in the intensity and location of NeuN immu-
noreactivity and the size of nuclei expressing
NeuN. Although anti-NeuN antibody primarily
stains the nuclei of most neuronal cells types in
the adult mouse brain and spinal cord, the cyto-
plasm can also be immunoreactive, although usu-
ally at a lower intensity (Mullen et al., 1992; Lind
et al., 2005). By contrast, we found that the neuro-
nal cytoplasm of processes in P. cinereus spinal
cords, primarily in the undamaged more proximal
spinal cord, can be intensely immunoreactive, out-
rivaling the intensity of nuclei in the same sec-
tions. In addition, the intensity of nuclear NeuN
immunoreactivity in P. cinereus varied greatly
within the same section, as did the size of nuclei.
Because levels of NeuN expression vary in differ-
ent cell types at different times in developing mice
central nervous system, high levels of NeuN
expression may correspond to the state of differen-
tiation or level of cell activity (Mullen et al., 1992;
Lind et al., 2005). Some evidence exists to support
either of these hypotheses in that axonal injury
strongly affects expression of NeuN in facial motor
neurons, less so in spinal cord neurons (McPhail
Fig. 10. Expression of nestin and vimentin in a spinal cord 5 days after autotomy. A: Distal
section, close to the plane of autotomy. B: More cranial section, but still showing some damage.
Vimentin-immunoreactivity is green; nestin-immunoreactivity is red; vimentin–nestin coexpres-
sion is yellow; and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central canal; scale line 5 20 lm.
Fig. 11. Expression of nestin and vimentin in a spinal cord 14 days after autotomy. A: Distal section. B and C: Progressively
more cranial sections. Vimentin-immunoreactivity is green; nestin-immunoreactivity is red; vimentin–nestin coexpression is yellow;
and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central canal; white arrow points to a mitotically active cell in the ependymal layer; scale
line 5 40 lm.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 221
Journal of Morphology
et al., 2004). In the regenerating spinal cords in P.
cinereus, the more uniform intensity of NeuN im-
munoreactivity in normal (unregenerating) spinal
cords supports this suggestion as cells are not
likely to be differentiating and more likely to be
functioning similarly to one another.
Nestin/Vimentin Expression
In P. cinereus, vimentin was expressed 2–4 days
before nestin in the perinuclear cytoplasm of the
ependymal layer, although this could not be con-
sidered a growing ependymal tube; by 5 days and
later, both nestin and vimentin were expressed by
the perinuclear cytoplasm of the ependymal cells,
whether considered ependymal layer or ependymal
tube. Thus, it seems as if the damaged spinal cord
quickly upregulates vimentin and probably nestin,
even before there is an identifiable ependymal
tube. Walder et al. (2003) reported that nestin and
vimentin were upregulated in P. waltl and N. viri-
descens in the regenerating ependymal tube 1
week after tail amputation, reaching highest in-
tensity at 2 weeks before decreasing and disap-
pearing. In axolotls, vimentin immunoreactivity
did not appear until 2–3-week postlesioning
(O’Hara et al., 1992). Comparisons with these spe-
cies and P. cinereus can only provisionally be
made, as neither study examined nestin or vimen-
tin expression before 1 week; that being said, P.
cinereus seems to begin steps to spinal cord regen-
eration earlier than these nonautotomizing spe-
cies. More proximally, in these early P. cinereus
Fig. 12. GFAP expression in a normal spinal cord and in spinal cords after autotomy. A: Normal spinal cord. B: Caudal-most
damaged spinal cord of a 5-day regenerating spinal cord. C: Growing ependymal tube in a 2-week regenerating spinal cord. D: A
more cranial section in a 2-week regenerating spinal cord. E and F: A 3-week-old regenerating spinal cord showing peripheral
GFAP expression. GFAP-immunoreactivity is green; NeuN-immunoreactivity is red; and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central
canal; scale line 5 20 lm.
Fig. 13. GFAP expression in an intact, never regenerated,
portion of a spinal cord 5 days after autotomy. GFAP-immunore-
activity is green; cc, central canal; scale line 5 30 lm.
222 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
regenerates (up to 14 days), both nestin and
vimentin were expressed in processes of the white
matter and associated with what looked like
enlarged cells that may be migrating microglial
cells. Nestin has been reported by at least one
study to be expressed by microglia (Sotelo et al.,
1994), as has vimentin (Graeber et al., 1988), and
the shape and position of the large labeled cells in
our sections are the same as we have seen in our
lectin studies of P. cinereus microglia (unpublished
observations). Surprisingly, it is hard to interpret
the white matter processes that are immunoreac-
tive for both nestin and vimentin as being radial.
Further, this immunoreactivity was present in
proximal sections in sections containing complete
spinal cords, although vimentin was present for a
longer period of time than nestin. Finally, vimen-
tin immunoreactivity in more proximal sections
was surprisingly intense in the perinuclear cyto-
plasm of cells peripheral to the ependymal layer,
many of which must be neurons, based on NeuN-ir
labeling, although we did not do double labeling
experiments with NeuN and vimentin to confirm
this. In mammals, vimentin is coexpressed with
neurofilament proteins in young neurons, disap-
pearing in mature neurons (Cochard and Paulin,
1984), except in the olfactory epithelium (Schwob
et al., 1986). Because our control spinal cords
showed little or no vimentin or nestin expression
in neurons, these proteins must be upregulated in
regenerating spinal cords, rather than continually
expressed as Schwob et al. (1986) showed in olfac-
tory receptor neurons. Further, vimentin and nes-
tin are upregulated in the spinal cord cranial to
the plane of amputation, not just in the regenerat-
ing ependymal tube, again suggesting that the
intact spinal cord of regenerating salamanders
also participates in the repopulating the growing
spinal cord. Clear radial fibers were vimentin posi-
tive in more proximal, usually complete spinal
cord sections. Although Walder et al. (2003)
reported no significant vimentin in normal P. waltl
spinal cords, Zamora and Mutin (1988) reported
heavy labeling in perinuclear cytoplasm and radial
arborizations of periependymal cells.
GFAP
In P. cinereus, as reported for other urodeles
(Zamora and Mutin, 1988; Naujoks-Manteuffel and
Roth, 1989; Holder et al., 1990; O’Hara et al.,
1992; Arsanto et al., 1992; Lazzari et al., 1997;
Walder et al., 2003), GFAP is expressed in radial
processes in the white matter of the normal spinal
cord, often clearly within the endfeet at the sub-
pial surface. In addition, GFAP appeared to be
perinuclear in some cells in the gray matter, which
only some studies reported (Zamora and Mutin,
1988; Naujoks-Manteuffel and Roth, 1989; Lazzari
et al., 1997), whereas others stated this never
occurred (Holder et al., 1990; O’Hara et al., 1992).
Rarely did studies of other urodeles report that
soma in the ependymal layer are GFAP-positive
(Walder et al., 2003). There are, however, differen-
ces in the reported position of radial glial cell
bodies, with some studies placing the cell bodies in
the layer immediately adjacent to the central canal
(Walder et al., 2003), which is where BrdU-ir stud-
ies such as the one reported here for P. cinereus
indicate they are, whereas other studies report
that radial glial cell bodies are displaced into the
periependymal gray matter (Zamora and Mutin,
1988; Naujoks-Manteuffel and Roth, 1989; Holder
et al., 1990; Lazzari et al., 1997). Spinal cord
regeneration in P. cinereus is marked by an
increase in GFAP expression within processes and
ependymal cell bodies, especially those undergoing
mitosis. Further, this upregulation of GFAP
Fig. 14. GFAP immunoreactivity 66 days after autotomy. A: Distal section. B and C: Progres-
sively more cranial sections. GFAP-immunoreactivity is green; NeuN-immunoreactivity is red;
and Hoescht nuclear label is blue; cc, central canal; scale line 5 30 lm.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 223
Journal of Morphology
extends cranially within the damaged and regener-
ating spinal cord and into what appears to be nor-
mal spinal cord. Walder et al. (2003) also reported
an increase in GFAP expression in the distal
regenerating spinal cord, although they did not
look in any detail in more cranial sections of the
spinal cord; they reported that GFAP expression is
the highest in the normal spinal cord and in
the more undifferentiated (distal) regenerate
within 1–2 weeks after amputation; thus, they con-
clude that GFAP expression is transiently lost just
as nestin and vimentin are expressed. Others
(Arsanto et al., 1992; O’Hara et al., 1992) only
observed GFAP expression in processes and end-
feet of regenerate, 2–4 weeks after amputation,
respectively. In comparison, GFAP expression in
regenerating P. cinereus seems to upregulate more
rapidly and more extensively within the spinal
cord cranial to the site of autotomy.
Known adult mammalian neurogenic zones (the
subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles
and the subgranular layer (SGL) of the hippocam-
pal dentate gyrus) contain several cell types with
specific GFAP, vimentin, and nestin expression
patterns. GFAP-expressing astrocytes in these
zones are the primary neuronal precursors
(Doetsch et al., 1997; Seri et al., 2004); in the SVZ,
these cells also express vimentin and nestin,
whereas in the SGL, some of these precursors also
express nestin (Seri et al., 2004). GFAP expression
is then lost in the transiently amplifying progeni-
tor cells after asymmetric division of the primary
neuronal precursor cells, but nestin continues to
be expressed. Eventually nestin expression also is
lost, to be replaced by neuronal markers, such as
NeuN. Thus, spinal cord regeneration in urodeles
follows a similar pattern of expression of markers
as for mammalian adult neurogenic zones, and the
more complicated expression of nestin and vimen-
tin in P. cinereus than what is reported by Walder
et al. (2003) for P. waltl and N. viridescens calls
into question whether or not the expression or re-
expression of nestin and vimentin indicates a re-
version of ependymal cells to a less mature pheno-
type, as they interpreted, as opposed to a generally
more plastic spinal cord that is linked to the con-
tinual tail growth in urodeles. Vimentin and nestin
expression in regenerating P. cinereus spinal cords
is not only limited to the ependymal tube but also
appears cranial to the plane of amputation and not
just in the ependymal layer.
Summary
P. cinereus shows mitotic activity within the
ependymal layer of the regenerating ependymal
tube as well as more proximally in the spinal cord
cranial to the plane of autotomy. This range of
mitotic activity is more extensive than reported for
other urodeles, which cannot autotomize their
tails. NeuN expression appears in ependymal cells
1 day after BrdU injection, although this expres-
sion is light. NeuN expression in other cells is
variable and often intense in both cell bodies
and in processes. In addition, this species shows
upregulation of nestin, vimentin, and GFAP within
days after tail autotomy; further, this expression
is upregulated cranially within the spinal cord
cranial to the plane of autotomy, not just within
the extending ependymal tube. Thus, the undam-
aged portion of the spinal cord is far more active
in regeneration than has been reported in other
urodeles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Erin Vanselous, Rachel
Margolis, Patrick Skelton, Kyle Davis, and Brenna
Duffy for providing technical assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
Arsanto J-P, Komorowski TE, Dupin F, Caubit X, Diano M,
Geraudie J, Carlson BM, Thouveny Y. 1992. Formation of the
peripheral nervous system during tail regeneration in urodele
amphibians: Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical stud-
ies of the origin of the cells. J Exp Zool 264:273–292.
Benraiss A, Arsanto JP, Coulon J, Thouveny Y. 1997. Neural
crest-like cells originate from the spinal cord during tail
regeneration in adult amphibian urodels. Dev Dyn 209:15–28.
Benraiss A, Arsanto JP, Coulon J, Thouveny Y. 1999. Neurogen-
esis during caudal spinal cord regeneration in adult newts.
Dev Genes Evol 209:363–369.
Chernoff EAG, Stocum DL, Nye HLD, Cameron JA. 2003.
Urodele spinal cord regeneration and related processes. Dev
Dyn 226:295–307.
Cochard P and Paulin D. 1984. Initial expression of neurofila-
ments and vimentin in the central and peripheral nervous
system of the mouse embryo in vivo. J Neurosci 4:2080–2094.
Dahl D. 1981. The vimentin-GFA protein transition in rat
neuroglia cytoskeleton occurs at the time of myelination.
J Neurosci Res 6:741–748.
Del Rio-Tsonis K, Tsonis PA. 2003. Eye regeneration at the mo-
lecular age. Dev Dyn 226:211–224.
Dinsmore C. 1977. Tail regeneration in the plethodontid sala-
mander, Plethodon cinereus: Induced autotomy versus surgi-
cal amputation. J Exp Zool 199:163–176.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Vedugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. 1997. Cellular
composition and three-dimensional organization of the
subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain.
J Neurosci 17:5046–5061.
Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim Da, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla
A. 1999. Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells
in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716.
Doyle K, Khan M, Cunningham AM. 2001. Expression of the in-
termediate filament protein nestin by sustentacular cells in
mature olfactory neuroepithelium. J Comp Neurol 437:186–
195.
Egar M, Sinder M. 1972. The role of ependyma in spinal cord
regeneration in the urodele, Triturus. Exp Neurol 37:422–
430.
Eng LF, Lee YL. 1995. Intermediate filaments in astrocytes. In:
Kettermann H, Ranson DR, editors. Neuroglia. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. pp 650–667.
Ferretti P, Zhang F, O’Neill P. 2003. Changes in spinal cord
regeneration though phylogenesis and development: Lesions
to be learnt. Dev Dyn 226:245–256.
224 E.M. DAWLEY ET AL.
Journal of Morphology
Fredericksen K, McKay RDG. 1988. Proliferation and differen-
tiation of rat neuroepithelial precursor cells in vivo. J Neuro-
sci 8:1144–1151.
Fukuda S, Kato E, Tozuka Y, Yamguchi M, Miyamoto Y, Hista-
sune T. 2003. Two distinct subpopulations of nestin-positive
cells in adult mouse dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 23:9357–9366.
Graeber MB, Steit WJ, Kreutzberg GW. 1988. The microglial cy-
toskeleton: Vimentin is localized within activated cells in situ.
J Neurocytol 17:573–580.
Hockfield S, McKay RDG. 1985. Identification of major cell
classes in the developing mammalian nervous system. J Neu-
rosci 5:3310–3328.
Holder N, Clarke JDW. 1988. Is a correlation between continu-
ous neurogenesis and directed axon regeneration in verte-
brate nervous system? Trends Neurosci 11:94–99.
Holder N, Clarke JDW, Kamalat T, Lane EB. 1990. Heterogene-
ity in spinal radial glia demonstrated by intermediate fila-
ment expression and HRP labeling. J Neurocytol 19:915–928.
Horner PJ, Power AE, Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Palmer TD,
Winkler J, Thal LJ, Gage FH. 2000. Proliferation and differ-
entiation of progenitor cells throughout the intact adult rat
spinal cord. J Neurosci 20:2218–2228.
Iten LE, Bryant SV. 1976. Stages of tail regeneration in the
adult newt, Nothophthalmus viridescens. J Exp Zool 196:283–
292.
Kempermann G. 2006. Adult Neurogenesis: Stem Cells and
Neuronal Development in the Adult Brain. New York: Oxford
University Press. 426 p.
Lazzari M, Franceschini V, Ciani F. 1997. Glial fibrillary acidic
protein and vimentin in radial glial of Ambystoma mexicanum
and Triturus carnifex: In immunocytochemical study. J Brain
Res 38:187–194.
Lind D, Franken S, Kappler J, Jankowski J, Schilling K. 2005.
Characterization of the neuronal marker NeuN as a multiply
phosphorylated antigen with discrete subcellular localization.
J Neurosci Res 79:295–302.
Mchedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzerow A, Tanaka,EM. 2007.
A clonal analysis of neural progenitors during axolotl spinal
cord regeneration reveals evidence for both spatially re-
stricted and multipotent progenitors. Development 134:2083–
2093.
McPhail LT, McBride CB, McGraw J, Steeves JD, Tetzlaff W.
2004. Axotomy abolishes NeuN expression in facial but not
rubrospinal neurons. Exp Neurol 185:182–190.
Mullen RJ, Buck CR, Smith AM. 1992. NeuN, a neuronal
specific nuclear protein in vertebrates. Development 116:201–
211.
Namiki J, Tator CH. 1999. Cell proliferation and nestin expres-
sion in the ependyma of the adult rat spinal cord after injury.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58:489–498.
Naujoks-Manteuffel C, Roth G. 1989. Astroglial cells in a sala-
mander brain (Salamandra salamandra) as compared to
mammals: A glial fibrillary acidic protein immunohistochem-
istry study. Brain Res 487:397–401.
Nye HLD, Cameron J, Chernoff EAG, Stocum DL. 2003. Regen-
eration of the urodele limb: A review. Dev Dyn 226:280–294.
O’Hara CM, Egar MW, Chernoff EAG. 1992. Reorganization of
the ependyma during axolotl spinal cord regeneration:
Changes in intermediate filament and fibronection expres-
sion. Dev Dyn 193:103–115.
Schwob JE, Farber NB, Gottlieb DI. 1986. Neurons of the olfac-
tory epithelium in adult rats contain vimentin. J Neurosci
6:208–217.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A.
2001. Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the adult mam-
malian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Collado-Morente L, McEwen BS,
Alvarez-Buylla A. 2004. Cell types, lineage, and architecture
of the germinal zone in the adult dentate gyrus. J Comp Neu-
rol 478:359–378.
Shaw G, Osborn M, Weber K. 1981. An immunofluorescent
microscopical study of the neurofilament triplet proteins,
vimentin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein within the adult
rat brain. Eur J Cell Biol 26:68–82.
Sotelo C, Alvarado-Mallart R-M, Frain M, Vernet M. 1994.
Molecular plasticity of adult Bergmann fibers is associated
with radial migration of grafted Purkinje cells. J Neurosci
14:124–133.
Tapscott SJ, Bennett GS, Toyama Y, Kleinbart F, Holtzer H.
1981. Intermediate filament proteins in the developing chick
spinal cord. Dev Biol 86:40–54.
Tohyama T, Lee V-Y, Rorke LB, Marvin M, McKay RDG,
Trojanowski JQ. 1992. Nestin expression in embryonic human
neuroepithelium and in human neuroepithelial tumor cells.
Lab Inves 66:303–313.
Wake DB, Dresner IG. 1967. Functional morphology and evolu-
tion of tail autotomy in salamanders. J Morph 122:265–306.
Walder S, Zhang F, Ferretti P. 2003. Up-regulation of neural
stem cell markers suggests the occurrence of dedifferentiation
in regenerating spinal cord. Dev Genes Evol 213:625–630.
Wiese C, Rolletschek A, Kania G, Blyszczuk P, Tarasov KV,
Tarasova Y, Wersto RP, Boheler KR, Wobus AM. 2004. Nestin
expression—A property of multi-lineage progenitor cells? Cell
Mole Life Sci 61:2510–2522.
Zamora AJ, Mutin M. 1988. Vimentin and glial fibrillary acidic
protein filaments in radial glia of the adult urodele spinal
cord. Neuroscience 27:279–288.
Zhang F, Ferretti P, Clarke JDW. 2003. Recruitment of postmi-
totic neurons into the regenerating spinal cord of urodeles.
Dev Dyn 226:341–348.
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION AFTER AUTOTOMY 225
Journal of Morphology
