REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
Significance of Remyelination by Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells
Transplanted into the Injured Spinal Cord
AKIMASA YASUDA,a,b OSAHIKO TSUJI,a SHINSUKE SHIBATA,b SATOSHI NORI,a,b MORITO TAKANO,a,b
YOSHIOMI KOBAYASHI,a,b YUICHIRO TAKAHASHI,a,b KANEHIRO FUJIYOSHI,a CHIKAKO MIYAUCHI HARA,b,c
ATSUHI MIYAWAKI,c HIROTAKA JAMES OKANO,b YOSHIAKI TOYAMA,a MASAYA NAKAMURA,a HIDEYUKI OKANOb,d
aDepartment of Orthopedic Surgery and bDepartment of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan; cLaboratory for Cell Function and Dynamics, Advanced Technology Development Group and
dRIKEN-Keio University Joint Research Laboratory, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan
Key Words. Spinal cord injury • Neural stem cell • Stem-cell transplantation • Oligodendrocytes • Remyelination • shiverer mutant mouse
ABSTRACT
Previous reports of functional recovery from spinal cord
injury (SCI) in rodents and monkeys after the delayed
transplantation of neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs)
have raised hopes that stem cell therapy could be used to
treat SCI in humans. More research is needed, however,
to understand the mechanism of functional recovery. Oli-
godendrocytes derived from grafted NS/PCs remyelinate
spared axons in the injured spinal cord. Here, we studied
the extent of this remyelination’s contribution to func-
tional recovery following contusive SCI in mice. To isolate
the effect of remyelination from other possible regenera-
tive benefits of the grafted cells, NS/PCs obtained from
myelin-deficient shiverer mutant mice (shi-NS/PCs) were
used in this work alongside wild-type NS/PCs (wt-NS/PCs).
shi-NS/PCs behaved like wt-NS/PCs in vitro and in vivo,
with the exception of their myelinating potential. shi-NS/
PC-derived oligodendrocytes did not express myelin basic
protein in vitro and formed much thinner myelin sheaths
in vivo compared with wt-NS/PC-derived oligodendrocytes.
The transplantation of shi-NS/PCs promoted some locomo-
tor and electrophysiological functional recovery but signif-
icantly less than that afforded by wt-NS/PCs. These
findings establish the biological importance of remyelina-
tion by graft-derived cells for functional recovery after the
transplantation of NS/PCs into the injured spinal cord.
STEM CELLS 2011;29:1983–1994
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.
INTRODUCTION
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) results in severe and per-
manent neurological deficits that can include paraplegia and
tetraplegia. However, there is currently no effective clinical
therapeutic option to improve the functional outcome follow-
ing SCI. Recent advances in stem cell biology are clearing
the way toward implementing therapeutic strategies to replace
lost neural cells through the transplantation of stem cells.
Such strategies could be applicable to many central nervous
system (CNS) disorders, and SCI may be one of the first con-
ditions treated with stem-cell transplantation therapy. To this
point, embryonic stem cells (ESCs), bone marrow mesenchy-
mal stem cells, and glial-restricted precursor cells have all
been reported to induce functional improvement following
their transplantation into the injured spinal cord [1–6].
In particular, we and others have reported beneficial
effects and improved functional recovery in experimental SCI
models following the transplantation of neural stem/progenitor
cells (NS/PCs) derived from the CNS [3, 6-10] or from pluri-
potent stem cells, including ESCs [11–14] and induced pluri-
potent stem cells (iPSCs) [15, 16]. Notably, Cummings and
colleagues showed that selective ablation of grafted cells
resulted in the subsequent deterioration of motor function in
animals that had initially demonstrated functional motor re-
covery after SCI. This indicates that the long-term survival of
grafted cells in the host spinal cord is very important for the
maintenance of functional recovery [3].
Although the underlying mechanism responsible for func-
tional recovery from SCI after stem-cell transplantation has
still remained unclear [17, 18], three mechanisms have been
proposed: the replacement of lost neurons to reconstruct local
circuitry, the remyelination of spared, demyelinated axons by
Author contributions: A.Y.: conception and design, experiments, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, and final approval
of manuscript; O.T.: conception and design, experiments, surgery, and data analysis and interpretation, S.S.: experiments and data
analysis and interpretation, S.N.: experiments, surgery, and data interpretation; M.T.: experiments, surgery, and data analysis; Y.K. and
Y.T.: experiments and data interpretation; K.F., C.M.H., A.M., H.J.O. and Y.T.: data analysis and interpretation; M.N. and H.O.:
conception and design, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, and final approval of manuscript.
Correspondence: Hideyuki Okano, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. Telephone: þ81-3-5363-3747; Fax: þ81-3-3357-5445; e-mail: hidokano@a2.keio.jp; or Masaya
Nakamura, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Orthopedic surgery, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo
160-8582, Japan. Telephone: þ81-3-3353-1211; Fax: þ81-3353-6597; e-mail: masa@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp, masa@a8.keio.jp Received June
6, 2011; accepted for publication October 5, 2011; first published online in STEM CELLS EXPRESS October 25, 2011. VC AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2011/$30.00/0 doi: 10.1002/stem.767
STEM CELLS 2011;29:1983–1994 www.StemCells.com
graft-derived oligodendrocytes, and the provision of trophic
support that reduces the damage and creates a permissive sub-
strate for axonal growth. In previous studies, the transplanta-
tion of NS/PCs derived from various sources into mouse SCI
models [3, 6, 12, 15] resulted in the remyelination of spared
axons by graft-derived oligodendrocytes and good recovery of
locomotor function after SCI. These findings could imply that
graft-derived oligodendrocytes play a role in functional recov-
ery. However, a causative relationship between the actions of
graft-derived oligodendrocytes, including remyelination, and
the observed functional recovery has not been fully addressed.
In this study, we analyzed the importance of graft-derived
oligodendrocytes to functional recovery after SCI by compar-
ing the transplantation of NS/PCs from wild-type mice with
NS/PCs from myelin-deficient shiverer mutant mice [19–21].
The latter have a partial deletion in the gene encoding myelin
basic protein (MBP) [22–25]. The present data establish the
importance of graft-derived oligodendrocytes in the functional
recovery of the injured spinal cord after NS/PC transplanta-
tion. This insight will be crucial for extending stem-cell-based
therapy to SCI repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
NS/PC Cultures
The methods for culture and expansion of NS/PCs were as
described previously [26]. In brief, the striata of Jcl:ICR
(ICR) background homozygous shiverer mutant mice and
wild-type C57BL/6J mice on embryonic day 14 were dissoci-
ated using a fire-polished glass pipette. The dissociated cells
were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in culture
medium followed by cell cluster (neurosphere) formation. For
differentiation, the neurospheres were cultured without serum
or growth factors. In vitro myelin marker assay was per-
formed with the method modified from Stankoff et al. [27]
(See Supporting Information Materials and Methods).
The proliferation assay was performed by measuring ATP,
which indirectly reflects the number of viable cells. Popula-
tion doubling times were determined using the ATP assay, as
described elsewhere [28, 29]. Trophic factor analysis was
also performed, as described previously [30] (See Supporting
Information).
Animal Model
Adult female NOD/SCID (NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/J) mice (8–
10 week old, 20–22 g, n ¼ 42; Charles River Laboratories,
Kanagawa, Japan) were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal
(i.p.) injection of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/
kg). After laminectomy at the 10th thoracic spinal vertebra
(T10), the dorsal surface of the dura mater was exposed. SCI
was induced as described previously [31], using a commer-
cially available SCI device (IH impactor, Precision Systems
and Instrumentation, Lexington, KY, USA; http://www.presy-
sin.com). This device creates a reliable contusion injury by
rapidly applying a force-defined impact (60 kdyn) with a
stainless steel-tipped impactor. All experiments were per-
formed in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals of Keio University School of
Medicine and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
Cell Transplantation
A fusion HIV-1 based lentiviral vector, expressing ffLuc
(Venus fused to firefly luciferase) under the control of the
elongation factor 1a (EF1a) promoter [30], was used to label
NS/PCs prior to grafting. This vector enabled the detection of
grafted cells as strong bioluminescent ffLuc signals in live
SCI mice and as fluorescent Venus signals using anti-green
fluorescent protein antibody in fixed spinal-cord sections. This
virus was obtained as previously reported [32]. The concen-
trated virus was added to the culture medium to infect pri-
mary NS/PCs derived from shiverer or wild-type mice (multi-
plicity of injection ¼ 1.0). The lentivirally transduced NS/PCs
(5  105 cells per two microliters) were transplanted into the
lesion epicenter 9 days after SCI as previously reported [11,
12, 15, 16, 31-33].
The NS/PCs were injected with a glass micropipette at a
rate of 1 ll/minute with a Hamilton syringe (25 ll) and a
stereotaxic microinjector (KDS 310, Muromachikikai Co.
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, http://www.muromachi.com). shi-NS/PCs
were transplanted into 15 mice (shi-NS/PC group), and wt-
NS/PCs were transplanted into 13 mice (wt-NS/PC group).
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 2 ll per mouse) was injected
into the lesion epicenter of control mice (control group; n ¼
14). After surgery, animal care was performed in the Support-
ing Information.
Bioimaging
The Xenogen-IVIS spectrum cooled charge-coupled device
(CCD) optical macroscopic imaging system (Caliper Life-
Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA; http://www.caliperls.com)
was used for bioimaging to confirm the survival of the trans-
planted NS/PCs. Monitoring was performed for 6 weeks after
the transplantation, as described previously with slight modifi-
cation [31] (See Supporting Information).
Motor Function Analysis
Hind limb motor function was evaluated for 7 weeks after
SCI using the locomotor rating test of the Basso Mouse Scale
(BMS) [34]. Well-trained investigators, blinded to the treat-
ments, performed the behavioral analysis, determining the
BMS scores at the same time each day. We also measured the
motor function of each group (n ¼ 5 each) on a rotating rod
apparatus (Muromachikikai Co., Ltd., Japan), consisting of a
plastic rod (3-cm diameter, 8-cm long) with a gritted surface,
flanked by two large discs (40-cm diameter). At 7 weeks after
SCI, mice from each group were tested by monitoring the
time that each mouse spent on the rod as it rotated at 10 rpm
during 2-minute sessions [35]. Three trials were conducted,
and the average and maximum numbers of seconds were
recorded. Gait analysis was performed using the DigiGait
Image Analysis System (Mouse Specifics, Quincy, MA, USA;
http://www.mousespecifics.com). Data collection for DigiGait
analysis was performed 7 weeks after injury, when each
mouse demonstrated consistent weight-supported hind limb
stepping on the treadmill at a speed of 8 cm/sec.
Histological Analyses
Animals were anesthetized and transcardially perfused with
4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS, 6 weeks after transplan-
tation. The spinal cords were removed, embedded in Optimal
Cutting Temperature compound (Sakura Finetechnical Co.,
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; http://www.sakuraus.com), and sectioned
in the sagittal/axial plane at 12 lm on a cryostat (Leica
CM3050 S, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany; http://
www.leica.com). Sections were stained with hematoxylin-
eosin (HE), or Luxol Fast Blue (LFB), or processed for
immunohistochemistry followed by quantitative analyses.
Samples were examined on an inverted fluorescence micro-
scope (BZ 9000; Keyence Co., Osaka, Japan; http://
www.keyence.co.jp) or a confocal laser-scanning microscope
(LSM 700, Carl Zeiss, Munchi, Germany; http://www.zeiss.
1984 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
com). We also performed immuno-electron microscopic anal-
yses (See Supporting Information).
Electrophysiology
Electrophysiological experiments were performed immediately
after injury, immediately after transplantation, and 7 weeks
after injury. An electromyography (EMG)/evoked potential
measuring system (Neuropack S1 MEB-9400 series, Nihon
Kohden, Tokyo, Japan; http://www.nihonkohden.co.jp) was
used. Mice were anesthetized with an i.p. injection of keta-
mine (40 mg/kg) and xylazine (4 mg/kg), as described in
other paper [16]. One electrode was injected into the spinal
cord of the occipito-cervical area to induce motor-evoked
potential (MEP) and the sciatic nerve to induce compound
motor action potential (CMAP). For the recording of the
potentials, two needle electrodes were placed in each hind
limb. The active electrode was placed in the muscle belly of
each limb, and the reference electrode was placed near the
distal tendon of the muscle. The ground electrode was placed
subcutaneously between the coil and the recording electrodes.
To induce MEP, a stimulation of 0.4 mA intensity was
applied at the electrode [16].
Throughout the experiments, the duration of the pulse was
0.2 ms. CMAPs were recorded by measuring the maximum
amplitude that was achieved by stimulating the sciatic nerve
with a single pulse of supramaximal intensity. The onset
latency was measured as the length of time in milliseconds
between the stimulus and the onset of the first wave. The
amplitude (mV) was measured from the initiation point of
the first wave to its highest point. Results were expressed as
the MEP/CMAP ratio (%) so as to adjust for differences
between individual mice [14, 36]. Ten responses were aver-
aged and sorted for off-line analysis.
Statistical Analyses
All data are presented as the mean 6 SEM. An unpaired two-
tailed Student’s t test was used for determining significant dif-
ferences between groups in the in vitro and in vivo differentia-
tion assays, the bioimaging analysis, analyses of the Venus-pos-
itive areas, and MEP analyses. Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by the Tukey-Kramer test for multiple comparisons
among the three transplantation groups was used for the 5-
hydroxytryptamine(HT) analysis, Rota-rod and gait analysis.
Repeated measures two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey-
Kramer test was used for analysis of the HE-, LFB-, and neuro-
filament-heavy chain (NF-H)-stained sections and BMS scores.
For all statistical analyses, the significance was set at p < .05.
RESULTS
In Vitro Characterization of NS/PCs Derived from
shiverer Mutant Mice Embryos
For the in vitro characterization of NS/PCs derived from shiv-
erer mutant mice, proliferation and differentiation assays were
performed. shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs were cultured as neuro-
spheres, as previously reported [26, 37]. The shi-NS/PCs
formed floating cell clusters (neurospheres) within 2–3 days
(Supporting Information Fig. 1A), with a morphology identical
to that of the wt-NS/PC-derived neurospheres (Supporting In-
formation Fig. 1B). The proliferation rates of the shi-NS/PCs
and wt-NS/PCs were evaluated indirectly by measuring the pro-
duction of ATP. There was no significant difference in the dou-
bling time between shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs (26.7 6 1.3
hours vs. 26.16 1.3 hours) (Supporting Information Fig. 1C).
An in vitro differentiation assay revealed that both shi-
NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs differentiated into neuron-specific
class III beta tubulin (Tuj-1)þ neurons, glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP)þ astrocytes, and 2030-cyclic nucleotide 30-
phosphodiesterase (CNPase)þ oligodendrocytes (Fig. 1A).
There were no significant differences in the proportions of the
different cell types generated between the shi-NS/PCs and wt-
NS/PCs (Tuj-1, 7.7 6 1.1% vs. 8.1 6 0.8%; GFAP, 65.4 6
1.9% vs. 64.9 6 1.8%; CNPase, 9.2 6 1.3% vs. 8.7 6 0.6%;
Fig. 1B). Next, oligodendroglial differentiation was examined
via the addition of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-AA
and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) to promote in vitro
myelination [27]. Although the wt-NS/PCs produced O1þ,
CNPaseþ, proteolipid protein (PLP)þ, and MBPþ oligo-
dendrocytes, the shi-NS/PCs produced oligodendrocytes
positive for O1, CNPase, and PLP but negative for MBP
(Fig. 1C, 1D).
Grafted shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs Survived
Within the Injured Spinal Cord
To identify and monitor the transplanted cells in the injured
spinal cord, both shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs were transduced
to express ffLuc under the EF1a promoter by lentiviral infec-
tion. Because of the stable and strong emission of ffLuc,
which is a fusion protein of Venus and luciferase, we could
identify the grafted cells as fluorescent Venus signals and bio-
luminescent luciferase signals (C.M. Hara et al., manuscript
submitted for publication). Prior to the transplantation, we
confirmed that ffLuc was expressed in the shi-NS/PCs by flu-
orescence microscopy (Fig. 2A) and was detectable by the
IVIS bioimaging system. We also confirmed the ffLuc trans-
duction into wt-NS/PCs, as previously reported [32]. Next,
shi-NS/PCs or wt-NS/PCs were transplanted into the lesion
site of NOD/SCID mice 9 days after contusive SCI.
The successful transplantation of shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/
PCs could be confirmed immediately by bioluminescence
imaging (BLI); the average signal intensity was (1.7 6 0.5) 
108 photons per mouse per sec in the transplanted mice. The
BLI analysis revealed that the signal intensity of the grafted
cells decreased sharply within the first week after transplanta-
tion but remained at approximately 20% of the initial signal
intensity in both shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PC groups throughout
the remaining period (Fig. 2C). After 6 weeks of transplanta-
tion, the survival of both grafted shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs
in and around the lesion site was detected in tissue sections
by anti-Venus immunostaining (Fig. 2D). There was no sig-
nificant difference in the survival rate detected by BLI
between the shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs groups (21.5 6 1.5%
vs. 18.3 6 1.4%), which was also confirmed by quantitative
histological analysis of the Venusþ area (0.021 6 0.003 mm2
vs. 0.024 6 0.004 mm2) 6 weeks after transplantation (Fig.
2E). Next, the migration of grafted cells was analyzed by
comparing Venusþ areas in axial sections of the spinal cord
for each group. No significant migratory differences were
revealed in and around the lesion site (Fig. 2F, 2G).
Grafted shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs Exhibited
Similar Differentiation Potential
To examine the differentiation potential of shi-NS/PCs grafted
into the injured spinal cord, we performed immunohistochem-
ical analyses 6 weeks after transplantation. The shi-NS/PCs
differentiated into Huþ neurons, GFAPþ astrocytes, and
APCþ oligodendrocytes (Fig. 3A). A comparison between the
cell types that differentiated from the shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/
PCs in vivo showed no significant differences (Huþ, 9.1 6
0.5% vs. 9.2 6 1.0%; GFAPþ, 54.3 6 2.0% vs. 56.7 6
Yasuda, Tsuji, Shibata et al. 1985
www.StemCells.com
2.4%; APCþ, 33.7 6 1.7% vs. 30.0 6 2.2% [Fig. 3B]), simi-
lar to our findings in vitro. Thus, the shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/
PCs gave rise to similar differentiated cell types in vivo as
well as in vitro.
Transplanted shi-NS/PCs Prevented Atrophic
Changes in the Injured Spinal Cord and
Promoted Axonal Growth After SCI
To examine the effects of shi-NS/PC transplantation on the
injured spinal cord, we first evaluated the amount of atrophy,
by HE staining (Fig. 4A). The transverse area of the spinal
cord at the lesion epicenter was significantly larger in both
the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups than in the control
group, and there was no difference between the amount of
enlargement in the experimental groups, suggesting that shi-
NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs provided equivalent protection from
atrophy (Fig. 4B). Next, we examined the effects of trans-
planted shi-NS/PCs on axonal growth after SCI by immuno-
histochemical analyses, with anti-NF-H (RT97) and anti-5-hy-
droxytryptamine (5-HT) antibodies. Although a few NF-Hþ
axons were observed at the rim of the epicenter in the control
Figure 1. In vitro differentiation characteristics of shi-neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs). (A): shi-NS/PCs differentiated into Tuj-1þ neu-
rons, GFAPþ astrocytes, and CNPaseþ oligodendrocytes, like wt-NS/PCs. Scale bar ¼ 50 lm. (B): There were no significant differences in the
proportion of differentiated cells generated by the shi-NS/PCs versus the wt-NS/PCs. (C): After adding platelet-derived growth factor AA and cil-
iary neurotrophic factor to the culture medium, both wt-NS/PCs and shi-NS/PCs differentiated into O1þ, CNPaseþ, and PLPþ oligodendrocytes.
Oligodendrocytes from shi-NS/PCs showed no MBP expression, as expected [22–24]. Scale bar ¼ 20 lm. (D): O1, CNPase, and PLP immuno-
staining assays showed no significant difference between the shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs, but MBPþ oligodendrocytes were only seen in cultures
of wt-NS/PCs (*p, < .01). Abbreviations: CNPase, 2030-cyclic nucleotide 30-phosphodiesterase; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MBP, myelin
basic protein; PLP, proteolipid protein; shi, shiverer; Tuj1, neuron-specific class III beta tubulin; wt, wild type.
1986 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
PBS-injected group (Fig. 4C), there were significantly more
NF-Hþ neuronal fibers in the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC
groups, at the lesion epicenter and at sites rostral and caudal
to it (Fig. 4D); the same effect was seen for 5-HTþ serotoner-
gic fibers at the lumbar enlargement, which are critical for
hind limb locomotor functions [38–40] (Fig. 4E, 4F).
Grafted wt-NS/PCs, but not shi-NS/PCs, Preserved
and/or Enhanced Myelination Within the Injured
Spinal Cord
In the control group, contusive SCI resulted in severe demye-
lination at the lesion site. Both the grafted shi-NS/PCs and
wt-NS/PCs showed preserved and/or enhanced myelination
Figure 2. Survival of grafted shi-neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) in the injured spinal cord. (A): Fluorescence and phase-contrast images
of shi-NS/PCs-derived neurospheres just before transplantation. Scale bar ¼ 100 lm. (B): Representative in vivo images of shi-NS/PCs trans-
planted into the injured spinal cord of an adult NOD/SCID mouse. Survival of grafted shi-NS/PCs was detected for 42 days after the transplanta-
tion. (C): Quantitative analysis of photon counts in recipients of shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC grafts revealed no significant difference in the survival
rate of the grafted cells for 42 days after the transplantation (n ¼ 6 mice per group, two-tailed t test). (D): Representative image of a midsagittal
section of a shi-NS/PC-grafted spinal cord that was immunostained for Venus using an anti-GFP antibody. Scale bar ¼ 500 lm. (E): Quantitative
analysis of the Venus-positive area at the lesion epicenter revealed no significant difference between the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups 6
weeks after transplantation (n ¼ 4). (F): Representative images of an axial section of lesion epicenter (left) and the area surrounding the lesion
(0.6-mm rostral from the lesion site: right) immunostained for Venus using an anti-GFP antibody. (G): Quantitative analysis of the migration of
grafted cells as assessed on the Venus-immunostained sections revealed no significant differences between shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups at
and around the lesion site (n ¼ 4 mice per group). Abbreviations: DAB, diaminobenzidine; GFP, green fluorescent protein; NOD/SCID, NOD/
SCID (NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/J); shi, shiverer; wt, wild type.
Yasuda, Tsuji, Shibata et al. 1987
www.StemCells.com
after SCI, compared with controls. Notably, the wt-NS/PC
group showed the largest LFBþ myelination area among the
three groups (Fig. 5A, 5B, 5C). Consistent with this finding,
Venusþ/MBPþ double-labeled myelin sheaths were seen in
the wt-NS/PC group but none were observed in the shi-NS/PC
group (Fig. 5D, 5E, 5F). We confirmed these findings by
immuno-electron microscopy (EM). In the shi-NS/PC group,
there were a few axonal profiles showing poor myelination
with Venusþ labeling, whereas in the wt-NS/PC group, pro-
files showing mature, Venusþ myelin sheaths were present.
Immuno-EM examination under higher magnification revealed
nanogold-labeled Venusþ spots in the outer and inner mes-
axons of the myelin cytoplasm (Fig. 5G, 5H). These findings
suggest that shi-NS/PC-derived oligodendrocytes made only
thin, poorly formed myelin sheathes, but those derived from
wt-NS/PCs were capable of forming mature sheathes on
remyelinated axons.
Transplanted wt-NS/PCs, but Not shi-NS/PCs,
Enhanced Significant Locomotor Functional
Recovery After SCI
We assessed locomotor functional recovery using the BMS
scoring of open field walking, the rota-rod treadmill test, and
gait analysis. We used PBS-injected animals as a negative
control, which exhibit little difference in BMS scores com-
pared to another negative control animals with fibroblast
transplantation [15].
Just after SCI (day 1), the animals exhibited complete
hind limb paralysis (BMS score 0), followed by gradual re-
covery that plateaued at around 4 weeks, in the control group.
Although there was no significant difference in the BMS
scores among the control, shi-NS/PC, and wt-NS/PC groups at
2 weeks after SCI, mice of the wt-NS/PC group had signifi-
cantly higher BMS scores than the control group mice on day
28 and thereafter. Conversely, the shi-NS/PC group showed a
little functional recovery soon after transplantation but it was
not statistically significant. By 6 weeks after transplantation,
the BMS score of the wt-NS/PC group was significantly
higher than that of the shi-NS/PC group (3.9 6 0.2 vs. 3.0 6
0.1; Fig. 6A). These data were consistent with the results of
the rota-rod treadmill and gait analyses. In the rota-rod tread-
mill test, the wt-NS/PC-transplanted mice remained on the
rod significantly longer than those of the control group,
whereas the shi-NS/PC-transplanted mice fell off the rod with
the similar timing to the control group (Fig. 6B). Gait charac-
teristics were measured with the DigiGait Image Analysis
System. Stride length was significantly greater in the wt-NS/
PC group than in the control group; however, the shi-NS/PC
group showed no significant difference compared with con-
trols (Fig. 6C).
Finally, an MEP analysis was performed as an electro-
physiological assessment to measure the MEP latency and
amplitude and to examine signal conduction in the injured
spinal cord. The latency of the MEP was measured from the
onset of the stimulus to the first response to each wave. None
of the mice demonstrated an MEP response immediately after
SCI or immediately after NS/PC transplantation (9 days after
SCI; Supporting Information Fig. 2). At 6 weeks after shi-NS/
PC transplantation, we detected MEP response of which la-
tency was significantly longer than that obtained after wt-NS/
PC transplantation (15.7 6 0.7 ms vs. 8.0 6 0.7 ms). Further-
more, MEP amplitude of shi-NS/PC group was significantly
smaller than that of wt-NS/PC group (MEP/CMAP 0.5 6
0.1% vs. 0.8 6 0.1%; Fig. 6F). By contrast, no MEP response
was detected in the control group under our experimental
Figure 3. In vivo differentiation characteristics of shi-neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) grafted into the injured spinal cord of NOD/SCID
mice. (A): shi-NS/PCs differentiated into Huþ neurons, GFAPþ astrocytes, and APCþ oligodendrocytes in vivo as well as in vitro. Scale bar ¼
20 lm (left), 5 lm (right). (B): The pattern of the differentiated phenotypes was also identical between the shi-NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs in vivo (n
¼ 5 mice per group). Abbreviations: APC, adenomatous polyposis coli antigen (APC: clone. CC1); GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; Hu;
NOD/SCID, NOD/SCID (NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/J); shi, shiverer; wt, wild type.
1988 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
conditions (Fig. 6D). These data support a critical role for sig-
nal conduction in the extent of hind limb locomotor func-
tional recovery following NS/PC transplantation.
DISCUSSION
There is increasing interest in stem-cell transplantation for the
diseased or injured CNS, including for SCI. Considering their
clinical application, the precise mechanisms of action of
many stem-cell populations still remain to be elucidated at
the preclinical level. Theoretically, possible mechanisms of
therapeutic effects of stem-cell transplantation in CNS dis-
eases/injuries include: (a) cell replacement for lost cells after
CNS damage (e.g., forming new oligodendrocytes and/or neu-
rons) and (b) trophic support to increase survival of host neu-
ral cells and host-mediated regeneration, repair, and/or plastic-
ity [3, 41]. While the latter mechanisms include short-term
neurotrophic/neuroprotective effects, the graft-derived cells
should differentiate into the appropriate cells and survive over
the long-term to achieve functional recovery through the cell
replacement.
Accordingly, to obtain long-term survival of graft-derived
cells in the damaged host CNS and to investigate the role of
graft-mediated remyelination in this study, we used a constitu-
tively immunodeficient animal model, NOD/SCID mice, as
hosts. NOD/SCID mice lack normal T-cell, B-cell, and com-
plement responses [42, 43]. The use of NOD/SCID mice is
known to result in a greater cell survival and engraftment for
allograft and xenograft in comparison with conventional
immunosuppressant treatment, that is, cyclosporin A or
FK506, which targets T-cell activation/proliferation via dis-
rupting calcineurin signaling. In most models using with con-
ventional pharmacologic immunosuppression, there is a pro-
gressive loss of cells for more than 1–4 months. In the initial
experiments for this study, we performed allografts using dif-
ferent mouse strains as grafts and recipients to investigate the
effects of NS/PCs derived from myelin-deficient shiverer mu-
tant versus wild-type mice. We maintain shiverer mutant
mice with the ICR background as a homozygous closed
colony. Because mice with the ICR background have been
poorly characterized with respect to histopathology or behav-
ioral assays after SCI, we selected C57BL/6J mice as the host
for NS/PC transplants. However, when shi-NS/PCs with the
ICR background were transplanted into C57BL/6J hosts
Figure 4. Effects of transplanted shi-neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) in the injured spinal cord. (A): Representative HE staining images
of an axially sectioned spinal cord at the lesion epicenter, 7 weeks after injury. (B): Quantitative analysis of the spinal cord area measured in
HE-stained axial sections through different regions. The transverse area of the spinal cord at the lesion epicenter was significantly larger in the
shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups than the vehicle control group (n ¼ 4 mice per group). (C): Representative images of sagittal sections stained
for NF-H, from in all three groups, showing the rim of the lesion epicenter. (D): Quantitative analysis of the NF-Hþ area at each distance point.
While few NF-Hþ neuronal fibers were seen at the lesion epicenter in the control group, there were significantly more NF-Hþ neuronal fibers in
the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups. This was also true at 0.3-mm caudal to the lesion. At 0.6-mm caudal and 0.3-mm rostral to the lesion, the
wt-NS/PC group had significantly more NF-Hþ fibers than the control group (n ¼ 4). (E): Representative images from all three groups of axial
sections stained for 5-HT at the lumbar enlargement. (F): Quantitative analysis of the 5-HTþ area in axial sections at the lumbar enlargement.
Significantly more 5-HTþ fibers were observed in the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC group than in the control group (n ¼ 4; *: p, < .05 in (B), (D),
and (F)). Scale bars ¼ 500 lm in (A), 50 lm in (C) and (E). Abbreviations: HE, hematoxylin-eosin; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; NF, neurofila-
ment; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; shi, shiverer; wt, wild type.
Yasuda, Tsuji, Shibata et al. 1989
www.StemCells.com
Figure 5. Grafted wt-neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs), but not shi-NS/PCs, preserved and/or enhanced myelination within the injured spi-
nal cord. (A): Representative LFB-staining images of axially sectioned spinal cord at the lesion epicenter, 7 weeks after the injury. (B): Higher
magnification images of the boxed areas in (A). (C): Quantitative analysis of the myelinated area assessed on LFB-stained axial sections revealed
a greater myelinated area in the wt-NS/PC group, with significant differences observed at all points assayed except 0.9-mm rostral to the epicen-
ter (n ¼ 4 mice per group; *, p < .05, wt-NS/PC group vs. shi-NS/PC group; **, p < .05, wt-NS/PC group vs. control). (D): Representative im-
munohistochemical images stained for Venus, MBP, and NF-H. In the shi-NS/PC group, there were no Venusþ/MBPþ double-positive myelin
sheaths even in areas in which myelin was rather well preserved. In the wt-NS/PC group, some MBP-positive myelin sheaths were also Venus
positive (arrows). (E): Quantitative analysis of Venusþ/MBPþ double-positive sheaths. There was no Venusþ/MBPþ double-positive myelin
sheath derived from shi-NS/PCs (*, p < .01). (F): Enlarged image of the boxed area in (D). wt-NS/PC-derived Venusþ sheath was also MBPþ
which enwrapped the NF-Hþ neuronal fiber. (G): By immuno-electron microscopy, the transplanted cells were clearly identifiable by the black
dots from the anti-green fluorescent protein (GFP) antibody. The number of GFPþ grafted cells in the injured site after spinal cord injury was
quite similar; however, the myelin lamellar structures were totally different between shi-NS/PC-derived (left) and wt-NS/PC-derived (right)
grafted cells. In the cytoplasm of the grafted shi-NS/PC-derived cells, multiple electron-lucent vacuoles were frequently observed, but they were
observed much less in the cells derived from wild-type grafts. (H): At high magnification, remyelinated axons could be found that were sur-
rounded by GFPþ transplanted cells (a–d). The GFP antibody labeling was often observed in the outer cytoplasm of the myelin (arrowheads).
Note the huge difference in thickness of the myelin sheaths in the recipients of the wt-NS/PCs compared with the recipients of the shi-NS/PCs.
Moreover, the formation of the major dense line in the newly formed myelin was selectively affected, especially in recipients of the shi mouse-
derived grafts. Arrows: remyelinating graft cells; arrowheads: GFP immunoreactivity was indicated as black dots, yellow area: GFP-positive area,
Scale bars ¼ 500 lm in (A), 50 lm in (B), 20 lm in (D), 10 lm in (F), 5 lm in (G), 0.1 lm in (H-a, b, c, d). Abbreviations: Ax, Axon; LFB,
Luxol Fast Blue; MBP, myelin basic protein; My: myelin; N, nucleus; NF-H, neurofilament-heavy chain; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; shi,
shiverer; V, vacuole; wt, wild type.
1990 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
Figure 6. Assessment of functional recovery after spinal cord injury (SCI) and neural stem/precursor cell (NS/PC) transplantation. (A): Mean
BMS scores for each group over the 7-week recovery period. Although there was no significant difference in the BMS scores among the control
(PBS), shi-NS/PC, and wt-NS/PC groups on day 14, the wt-NS/PC group exhibited significantly better functional recovery than the control
group on day 28 and thereafter. There was no significant difference in the BMS scores between the shi-NS/PC and control groups. Furthermore,
the wt-NS/PC group showed significantly better recovery than the shi-NS/PC group on days 42 and 49 (control, n ¼ 14; shi-NS/PC group, n ¼
15; wt-NS/PC group, n ¼ 13; *, p < .05, wt-NS/PC group vs. control; **, p < .05, wt-NS/PC group vs. shi-NS/PC group or wt-NS/PCs group
vs. control). (B): Time on the rotating rod in each group, 7 weeks after injury. The wt-NS/PC group stayed on the rod significantly longer than
the control (PBS) group. There was no significant difference between the shi-NS/PC group and the control group (n ¼ 5 each; *, p < .05). (C):
Stride length of each group obtained by gait analysis. The wt-NS/PC group showed a significantly greater stride length than the control group.
There was no significant difference between that of the shi-NS/PC group and the control (PBS) group (n ¼ 5 each; *, p < .05). (D): Representa-
tive profiles of MEPs from each group evaluated 7 weeks after injury. Although MEP waves were detected in the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC
groups, no waves were detected in the control (PBS) group. (E): Latency of MEP response in the shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups. The MEP
latency was significantly longer in the shi-NS/PC group than in the wt-NS/PC group (n ¼ 3 each; *, p < .05). (F): MEP amplitude assessed by
the MEP/CMAP ratio (%) of shi-NS/PC and wt-NS/PC groups. The wt-NS/PC group showed a significantly higher MEP amplitude than did the
shi-NS/PC group (n ¼ 3 each; *, p < .05). Abbreviations: BMS, Basso Mouse Scale; CMAP, compound motor action potential; MEP, motor-
evoked potential; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; shi, shiverer; wt, wild type.
Yasuda, Tsuji, Shibata et al. 1991
www.StemCells.com
without immunosuppression, their cell survival was much
poorer than that of wt-NS/PCs derived from C57BL/6J mice.
This was unexpected as the CNS is generally considered to be
immune privileged. In fact, no surviving shi-NS/PCs were
observed in the injured spinal cord of the C57BL/6J host at 5
weeks after transplantation, and no functional recovery was
detected (Supporting Information Fig. 3). Thus, rather than
using conventional pharmacologic immunosuppression, to
minimize immunological barriers for long-term engraftment
after SCI, we adopted NOD/SCID mice as hosts, which could
be used as recipients even in the xenograft of human cells
into SCI mice models [3, 41]. While NOD/SCID mice have
neutrophils, macrophages, and microglia resulting in innate
immune responses, we observed similar survival rate of shi-
NS/PCs and wt-NS/PCs for all through 6 weeks and identical
differentiation characteristics in the injured spinal cord. More-
over, we observed no evidence of progressive loss of either
shi-derived or wt-derived cells.
Based on these grounds, by taking advantage of NOD/
SCID mice as host, we investigated the role of graft-derived
remyelination in functional recovery after NS/PC transplanta-
tion for SCI, which has been proposed as a possible mecha-
nism [17, 44]. We found that the grafted NS/PCs were differ-
entiated into oligodendrocytes and remyelinated spared axons
in the injured spinal cord. Although some spontaneous remye-
lination by endogenous oligodendrocyte precursor cells
(OPCs) is seen after SCI, the number of demyelinated axons
increases in the chronic phase [45]. These observations
prompted studies in which myelinating Schwann cells [46,
47], olfactory ensheathing glia [48, 49], and OPCs [50, 51]
were transplanted in the hope that remyelination of the
remaining axonal pathways by these cells would induce symp-
tomatic relief after SCI. In fact, these reports showed promis-
ing results in locomotor functional recovery and histological
assessments, which included evidence of graft-derived remye-
lination. The connection between remyelination and functional
recovery, however, was not directly addressed in these
reports.
Here, by using the deficient myelination in shiverer mu-
tant mice, we have obtained direct evidence that remyelina-
tion by graft-derived oligodendrocytes contributes greatly to
the functional recovery after SCI. Because of their genetic
lack of MBP, a major component of CNS myelin, shiverer
mutant mice have been used in numerous studies as transplant
hosts for engrafted wild-type donor cells, including ESCs [52,
53], Schwann cells [54, 55], NS/PCs [56, 57], glial precursors
[58], OPCs [59], and iPSC-derived NS/PCs [15], all of which
produced mature myelin that was unequivocally detected by
immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, a previous study on chi-
meric shiverer/wild-type mice showed that the myelination
defects caused by the shiverer mutation are cell-autonomous,
and that the myelin sheaths elaborated by shiverer mutant oli-
godendrocytes do not harm wild-type sheaths [60]. In this
study, we used the shiverer mice not as hosts but as donors,
to determine whether shiverer NS/PCs could promote func-
tional recovery after SCI. To the best of our knowledge, there
are no previous reports in which shiverer mouse cells have
been used as grafts.
In this study, we first confirmed the similarity of shi-NS/
PCs to wt-NS/PCs in vitro as well as in vivo. The shi-NS/PCs
and wt-NS/PCs showed similar proliferation rates in vitro and
survival rates within the injured spinal cord. Furthermore, the
differentiation pattern of shi-NS/PCs was quite similar to that
of wt-NS/PCs both in vitro and in vivo. A previous in vitro
study demonstrated that OPCs derived from shiverer mice dif-
ferentiate into mature oligodendrocytes [61]. Consistent with
this, we found that shi-NS/PCs differentiated into CNPaseþ
oligodendrocytes, indicating their capacity to generate a sub-
set of myelin proteins. Furthermore, the shi-NS/PCs gave rise
to O1 and PLPþ oligodendrocytes, which are thought to rep-
resent mature cells [62, 63].
A previous in vivo study also showed that the formation of
a thin myelin sheath is common in the shiverer CNS [64]. In
shiverer mice, however, the CNS myelin is not uniformly com-
pacted, and the axoglial junctions are irregular in shape, size,
and distribution [65], suggesting that MBP plays a critical role
in the compaction of CNS myelin. Consistent with their find-
ings, our immuno-EM studies showed that shi-NS/PC-derived
oligodendrocytes formed only thin and loose myelin sheaths,
while wt-NS/PC-derived oligodendrocytes formed far more sub-
stantial myelin sheaths. At the chronic phase of SCI, some
axons remain demyelinated and others have only thin myelin
sheaths [66], which causes abnormal signal conduction [67].
The thinly myelinated axons in the shi-NS/PC group could not
conduct signals very well, resulting in an increased MEP latency
and a smaller amplitude in the shi-NS/PC group compared with
the wt-NS/PC group. Recent studies have established MEP as a
sensitive technique for recording conduction in the CNS [14, 36,
68-70]. Eftekharpour et al. [56] demonstrated a significantly
shortened latency in the spinal cord-evoked potential in adult
shiverer mice after wild-type NS/PCs transplantation, suggesting
that conduction differences could be owing to spinal cord myeli-
nation, all else being equal.
In this study, we did not detect any MEP response in the
control group, although even the shi-NS/PC-grafted animals
exhibited a low-level MEP response with the longer latency and
smaller amplitude (Fig. 6D, 6E). The significant difference in
the latency and amplitude between shi-NS/PC- and wt-NS/PC-
grafted animals indicated that nerve conduction in the spinal
cord was impaired in the mutant group, which could potentially
be due to faulty remyelination by the myelin-deficient graft-
derived oligodendrocytes. Conversely, the current findings sug-
gest that the transplantation of NS/PCs, regardless of their
capacity to generate myelin, improves nerve conduction enough
to elicit at least a minimal signal. Furthermore, the remyelina-
tion by wt-NS/PCs-derived oligodendrocytes shortened the MEP
latency compared to remyelination by myelin-deficient oligoden-
drocytes, putatively by enabling saltatory conduction.
The difference in the myelinating capacity of the wt- and
shi-NS/PC-derived oligodendrocytes also affected the myelinated
area of the injured spinal cord. The increase in the LFBþ my-
elinated area in the wt-NS/PC group may be attributable to
remyelination as well as the prevention of demyelination. In fact,
the transplantation of shi-NS/PCs also enlarged the LFBþ area,
primarily by preventing demyelination, and resulted in the func-
tional improvement observed in the early time points after trans-
plantation in the shi-NS/PC group, as in the wt-NS/PC group.
Some studies have reported that the application of growth
factors prevents demyelination after SCI [71, 72]. Functional
recovery was observed soon after the treatment in those studies
and this one, suggesting that trophic factors cause functional re-
covery early in the post-transplantation period. In fact, we con-
firmed that the shi-NS/PCs expressed mRNAs for many trophic
factors, at levels that were almost identical to those of wt-NS/
PCs (Supporting Information Fig. 4). Among these, the mRNAs
encoding CNTF, growth and differentiation factor (GDF11),
PDGF A (PDGFA), and vascular endothelial growth factor B
showed relatively high expression levels. Other reports that dis-
cuss cell transplantation approaches for the treatment of SCI
have emphasized the significance of trophic factors secreted by
the grafted cells [73]. It is possible that trophic support pro-
vided by the grafts prevents demyelination and promotes
functional recovery, although our finding that the growth
factor mRNAs levels were almost the same in wt- and
1992 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
shi-neurospheres suggests that they probably have only a partial
effect, if any. Although other studies have suggested that graft-
derived neurons [33, 74] and astrocytes [1] are important for
functional recovery, similar percentages of the various cell
types were generated by the wt- and shi-NS/PCs in this study.
CONCLUSION
We demonstrated that grafted NS/PCs-derived remyelination
contributed to functional recovery after SCI. As myelination is a
predominant contribution of grafted NS/PCs, NS/PCs can clearly
target the myelination/demyelination issue and thus NS/PCs
indeed hold promise for SCI treatment. Here, we elucidated one
of the mechanisms that contribute to the efficacy of transplant-
ing NS/PCs for SCI. Further comparisons of NS/PC and OPC
transplantations will be needed before they can be used clini-
cally. While not required by the Food and Drug Administration,
we and others in the field believe that unraveling the regenera-
tive mechanisms piece by piece is the quickest way to develop
clinical approaches for the repair of SCI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. Kunihiko Suzuki, Kinuko Suzuki, and
Aileen Anderson for their critical comments on the manu-
script; Tokuko Harada for tender animal care; Sachiyo
Miyao and Hiroko Shimada for technical support; and Dr.
Hiroko Baba (Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sci-
ence) for the kind gift of the shiverer mice. This work was
supported by grants from the Program for the Promotion of
Fundamental Studies in Health Sciences of the National
Institute of Biomedical Innovation (NIBIO); a grant from
the Uehara Memorial Foundation; Grants-in-Aid for Scien-
tific Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) and the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT); the Pro-
ject for the Realization of Regenerative Medicine and sup-
port for the core institutes for iPSC research from MEXT;
the ‘‘Funding Program for World-leading Innovative R&D
on Science and Technology’’ to H.O. from the Ministry of
Health, Labor, and Welfare; the General Insurance Associa-
tion of Japan; Research Fellowships for Young Scientists
from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; Keio
Gijuku Academic Development Funds; and a Grant-in-aid
for the Global COE program from MEXT to Keio
University.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicate no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1 Hofstetter CP, Schwarz EJ, Hess D et al. Marrow stromal cells form
guiding strands in the injured spinal cord and promote recovery. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:2199–2204.
2 Cao Q, Xu XM, Devries WH et al. Functional recovery in traumatic
spinal cord injury after transplantation of multineurotrophin-expressing
glial-restricted precursor cells. J Neurosci 2005;25:6947–6957.
3 Cummings BJ, Uchida N, Tamaki SJ et al. Human neural stem cells
differentiate and promote locomotor recovery in spinal cord-injured
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:14069–14074.
4 Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G et al. Human embryonic stem cell-
derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and
restore locomotion after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 2005;25:
4694–4705.
5 Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Eftekharpour E, Wang J et al. Delayed trans-
plantation of adult neural precursor cells promotes remyelination and
functional neurological recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci
2006;26:3377–3389.
6 Salazar DL, Uchida N, Hamers FP et al. Human neural stem cells dif-
ferentiate and promote locomotor recovery in an early chronic spinal
cord injury NOD-scid mouse model. PLoS ONE 2010;5:e12272.
7 Ogawa Y, Sawamoto K, Miyata T et al. Transplantation of in vitro-
expanded fetal neural progenitor cells results in neurogenesis and
functional recovery after spinal cord contusion injury in adult rats. J
Neurosci Res 2002;69:925–933.
8 Hofstetter CP, Holmstrom NA, Lilja JA et al. Allodynia limits the
usefulness of intraspinal neural stem cell grafts; directed differentia-
tion improves outcome. Nat Neurosci 2005;8:346–353.
9 Iwanami A, Kaneko S, Nakamura M et al. Transplantation of human
neural stem cells for spinal cord injury in primates. J Neurosci Res
2005;80:182–190.
10 Moreno-Manzano V, Rodriguez-Jimenez FJ, Garcia-Rosello M et al.
Activated spinal cord ependymal stem cells rescue neurological func-
tion. Stem Cells 2009;27:733–743.
11 McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y et al. Transplanted embryonic stem
cells survive, differentiate and promote recovery in injured rat spinal
cord. Nat Med 1999;5:1410–1412.
12 Kumagai G, Okada Y, Yamane J et al. Roles of ES cell-derived glio-
genic neural stem/progenitor cells in functional recovery after spinal
cord injury. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e7706.
13 Chen J, Bernreuther C, Dihne M et al. Cell adhesion molecule l1-
transfected embryonic stem cells with enhanced survival support
regrowth of corticospinal tract axons in mice after spinal cord injury.
J Neurotrauma 2005;22:896–906.
14 Erceg S, Ronaghi M, Oria M et al. Transplanted oligodendrocytes and
motoneuron progenitors generated from human embryonic stem cells
promote locomotor recovery after spinal cord transection. Stem Cells
2010;28:1541–1549.
15 Tsuji O, Miura K, Okada Y et al. Therapeutic potential of appropri-
ately evaluated safe-induced pluripotent stem cells for spinal cord
injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:12704–12709.
16 Nori S, Okada Y, Yasuda A et al. Grafted human-induced pluripotent
stem-cell-derived neurospheres promote motor functional recovery af-
ter spinal cord injury in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:
16825–16830.
17 Barnabe-Heider F, Frisen J. Stem cells for spinal cord repair. Cell
Stem Cell 2008;3:16–24.
18 Lindvall O, Kokaia Z. Stem cells in human neurodegenerative disor-
ders–time for clinical translation? J Clin Invest 2010;120:29–40.
19 Bird TD, Farrell DF, Sumi SM. Brain lipid composition of the shiv-
erer mouse: (genetic defect in myelin development). J Neurochem
1978;31:387–391.
20 Dupouey P, Jacque C, Bourre JM et al. Immunochemical studies of
myelin basic protein in shiverer mouse devoid of major dense line of
myelin. Neurosci Lett 1979;12:113–118.
21 Privat A, Jacque C, Bourre JM et al. Absence of the major dense line
in myelin of the mutant mouse ‘‘shiverer’’. Neurosci Lett 1979;12:
107–112.
22 Roach A, Boylan K, Horvath S et al. Characterization of cloned
cDNA representing rat myelin basic protein: Absence of expression in
brain of shiverer mutant mice. Cell 1983;34:799–806.
23 Kimura M, Inoko H, Katsuki M et al. Molecular genetic analysis of
myelin-deficient mice: Shiverer mutant mice show deletion in gene (s)
coding for myelin basic protein. J Neurochem 1985;44:692–696.
24 Roach A, Takahashi N, Pravtcheva D et al. Chromosomal mapping of
mouse myelin basic protein gene and structure and transcription of the
partially deleted gene in shiverer mutant mice. Cell 1985;42:149–155.
25 Mikoshiba K, Okano H, Tamura T et al. Structure and function of
myelin protein genes. Annu Rev Neurosci 1991;14:201–217.
26 Reynolds BA, Tetzlaff W, Weiss S. A multipotent EGF-responsive
striatal embryonic progenitor cell produces neurons and astrocytes. J
Neurosci 1992;12:4565–4574.
27 Stankoff B, Aigrot MS, Noel F et al. Ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF) enhances myelin formation: A novel role for CNTF and
CNTF-related molecules. J Neurosci 2002;22:9221–9227.
28 Kanemura Y, Mori H, Kobayashi S et al. Evaluation of in vitro prolif-
erative activity of human fetal neural stem/progenitor cells using
Yasuda, Tsuji, Shibata et al. 1993
www.StemCells.com
indirect measurements of viable cells based on cellular metabolic ac-
tivity. J Neurosci Res 2002;69:869–879.
29 Yamane J, Nakamura M, Iwanami A et al. Transplantation of galec-
tin-1-expressing human neural stem cells into the injured spinal cord
of adult common marmosets. J Neurosci Res 2010;88:1394–1405.
30 Stirling DP, Liu S, Kubes P et al. Depletion of Ly6G/Gr-1 leukocytes
after spinal cord injury in mice alters wound healing and worsens neu-
rological outcome. J Neurosci 2009;29:753–764.
31 Okada S, Ishii K, Yamane J et al. In vivo imaging of engrafted neural
stem cells: Its application in evaluating the optimal timing of trans-
plantation for spinal cord injury. FASEB J 2005;19:1839–1841.
32 Takahashi Y, Tsuji O, Kumagai G et al. Comparative study of meth-
ods for administering neural stem/progenitor cells to treat spinal cord
injury in mice. Cell Transplant 2011;205:727–739.
33 Abematsu M, Tsujimura K, Yamano M et al. Neurons derived from
transplanted neural stem cells restore disrupted neuronal circuitry in a
mouse model of spinal cord injury. J Clin Invest 2010;120:3255–
3266.
34 Basso DM, Fisher LC, Anderson AJ et al. Basso Mouse Scale for
locomotion detects differences in recovery after spinal cord injury in
five common mouse strains. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:635–659.
35 Ogura H, Matsumoto M, Mikoshiba K. Motor discoordination in mu-
tant mice heterozygous for the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate re-
ceptor. Behav Brain Res 2001;122:215–219.
36 Oria M, Chatauret N, Raguer N et al. A new method for measuring
motor evoked potentials in the awake rat: Effects of anesthetics. J
Neurotrauma 2008;25:266–275.
37 Reynolds BA, Rietze RL. Neural stem cells and neurospheres—re-
evaluating the relationship. Nat Methods 2005;2:333–336.
38 Kim JE, Liu BP, Park JH et al. Nogo-66 receptor prevents raphespinal
and rubrospinal axon regeneration and limits functional recovery from
spinal cord injury. Neuron 2004;44:439–451.
39 Kaneko S, Iwanami A, Nakamura M et al. A selective Sema3A inhibi-
tor enhances regenerative responses and functional recovery of the
injured spinal cord. Nat Med 2006;12:1380–1389.
40 Murray KC, Nakae A, Stephens MJ et al. Recovery of motoneuron
and locomotor function after spinal cord injury depends on constitu-
tive activity in 5-HT2C receptors. Nat Med 2010;16:694–700.
41 Anderson AJ, Haus DL, Hooshmand MJ et al. Achieving stable
human stem cell engraftment and survival in the CNS: Is the future of
regenerative medicine immunodeficient? Regen Med 2011;6:367–406.
42 Shultz LD, Schweitzer PA, Christianson SW et al. Multiple defects
in innate and adaptive immunologic function in NOD/LtSz-scid mice.
J Immunol 1995;154:180–191.
43 Greiner DL, Hesselton RA, Shultz LD. SCID mouse models of human
stem cell engraftment. Stem Cells 1998;16:166–177.
44 Okano H. Neural stem cells: Progression of basic research and per-
spective for clinical application. Keio J Med 2002;51:115–128.
45 Totoiu MO, Keirstead HS. Spinal cord injury is accompanied by
chronic progressive demyelination. J Comp Neurol 2005;486:373–383.
46 Kuhlengel KR, Bunge MB, Bunge RP. Implantation of cultured sen-
sory neurons and Schwann cells into lesioned neonatal rat spinal cord.
I. Methods for preparing implants from dissociated cells. J Comp Neu-
rol 1990;293:63–73.
47 Martin D, Schoenen J, Delree P et al. Grafts of syngenic cultured,
adult dorsal root ganglion-derived Schwann cells to the injured spinal
cord of adult rats: Preliminary morphological studies. Neurosci Lett
1991;124:44–48.
48 Li Y, Field PM, Raisman G. Repair of adult rat corticospinal tract by
transplants of olfactory ensheathing cells. Science 1997;277:2000–
2002.
49 Imaizumi T, Lankford KL, Kocsis JD. Transplantation of olfactory
ensheathing cells or Schwann cells restores rapid and secure conduc-
tion across the transected spinal cord. Brain Res 2000;854:70–78.
50 Bambakidis NC, Miller RH. Transplantation of oligodendrocyte pre-
cursors and sonic hedgehog results in improved function and white
matter sparing in the spinal cords of adult rats after contusion. Spine J
2004;4:16–26.
51 Cao Q, He Q, Wang Y et al. Transplantation of ciliary neurotrophic
factor-expressing adult oligodendrocyte precursor cells promotes
remyelination and functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neu-
rosci 2010;30:2989–3001.
52 Liu S, Qu Y, Stewart TJ et al. Embryonic stem cells differentiate into
oligodendrocytes and myelinate in culture and after spinal cord trans-
plantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:6126–6131.
53 Low HP, Greco B, Tanahashi Y et al. Embryonic stem cell rescue of
tremor and ataxia in myelin-deficient shiverer mice. J Neurol Sci
2009;276:133–137.
54 Baron-Van Evercooren A, Gansmuller A, Duhamel E et al. Repair of
a myelin lesion by Schwann cells transplanted in the adult mouse spi-
nal cord. J Neuroimmunol 1992;40:235–242.
55 McKenzie IA, Biernaskie J, Toma JG et al. Skin-derived precursors
generate myelinating Schwann cells for the injured and dysmyelinated
nervous system. J Neurosci 2006;26:6651–6660.
56 Eftekharpour E, Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Wang J et al. Myelination of
congenitally dysmyelinated spinal cord axons by adult neural precur-
sor cells results in formation of nodes of Ranvier and improved axonal
conduction. J Neurosci 2007;27:3416–3428.
57 Mothe AJ, Tator CH. Transplanted neural stem/progenitor cells gener-
ate myelinating oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells in spinal cord de-
myelination and dysmyelination. Exp Neurol 2008;213:176–190.
58 Windrem MS, Schanz SJ, Guo M et al. Neonatal chimerization with
human glial progenitor cells can both remyelinate and rescue the oth-
erwise lethally hypomyelinated shiverer mouse. Cell Stem Cell 2008;
2:553–565.
59 Windrem MS, Nunes MC, Rashbaum WK et al. Fetal and adult
human oligodendrocyte progenitor cell isolates myelinate the congeni-
tally dysmyelinated brain. Nat Med 2004;10:93–97.
60 Mikoshiba K, Yokoyama M, Takamatsu K et al. Chimeric analysis of
the pathogenesis of dysmyelination of shiverer mutant mice. Presence
of patches of MBP-positive and negative sites in white matter indicat-
ing the absence of humoral factors for dysmyelination. Dev Neurosci
1982;5:520–524.
61 Seiwa C, Kojima-Aikawa K, Matsumoto I et al. CNS myelinogenesis
in vitro: Myelin basic protein deficient shiverer oligodendrocytes. J
Neurosci Res 2002;69:305–317.
62 Okano H, Miura M, Moriguchi A et al. Inefficient transcription of the
myelin basic protein gene possibly causes hypomyelination in myelin-
deficient mutant mice. J Neurochem 1987;48:470–476.
63 McDonald JW, Belegu V. Demyelination and remyelination after spi-
nal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:345–359.
64 Rosenbluth J. Central myelin in the mouse mutant shiverer. J Comp
Neurol 1980;194:639–648.
65 Inoue Y, Nakamura R, Mikoshiba K et al. Fine structure of the central
myelin sheath in the myelin deficient mutant Shiverer mouse, with
special reference to the pattern of myelin formation by oligodendro-
glia. Brain Res 1981;219:85–94.
66 Griffiths IR, McCulloch MC. Nerve fibres in spinal cord impact inju-
ries. Part 1. Changes in the myelin sheath during the initial 5 weeks. J
Neurol Sci 1983;58:335–349.
67 Nashmi R, Fehlings MG. Changes in axonal physiology and morphol-
ogy after chronic compressive injury of the rat thoracic spinal cord.
Neuroscience 2001;104:235–251.
68 Pluchino S, Quattrini A, Brambilla E et al. Injection of adult neuro-
spheres induces recovery in a chronic model of multiple sclerosis. Na-
ture 2003;422:688–694.
69 Biffi A, De Palma M, Quattrini A et al. Correction of metachromatic
leukodystrophy in the mouse model by transplantation of genetically
modified hematopoietic stem cells. J Clin Invest 2004;113:1118–1129.
70 Ito Z, Sakamoto K, Imagama S et al. N-Acetylglucosamine 6-O-sulfo-
transferase-1-deficient mice show better functional recovery after spi-
nal cord injury. J Neurosci 2010;30:5937–5947.
71 Jakeman LB, Wei P, Guan Z et al. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
stimulates hindlimb stepping and sprouting of cholinergic fibers after
spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 1998;154:170–184.
72 Kitamura K, Iwanami A, Nakamura M et al. Hepatocyte growth factor
promotes endogenous repair and functional recovery after spinal cord
injury. J Neurosci Res 2007;85:2332–2342.
73 Sharp J, Frame J, Siegenthaler M et al. Human embryonic stem cell-
derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants improve recovery
after cervical spinal cord injury. Stem Cells 2010;28:152–163.
74 Courtine G, Gerasimenko Y, van den Brand R et al. Transformation
of nonfunctional spinal circuits into functional states after the loss of
brain input. Nat Neurosci 2009;12:1333–1342.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
1994 Significance of Remyelination by Grafted NS/PCs
