Chemically extracted acellular muscle: A new potential scaffold for
spinal cord injury repair
Xiu-Ying Zhang,1,2* Hui Xue,1* Jia-Mei Liu,1 Dong Chen1,3
1Department of Histology and Embryology, Bethune School of Medical Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130021,
People’s Republic of China
2Department of Fundamental Nursing, School of Nursing, Jilin University, Changchun 130021,
Jilin Province, People’s Republic of China
3Department of Histology and Embryology, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan, 523808, People’s Republic of China
Received 22 April 2011; revised 11 August 2011; accepted 15 August 2011
Published online 30 December 2011 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.33237
Abstract: Extracellular matrix is the gold standard for tissue
regeneration. In this study, we directly made the extracellular
matrix of the tissue or organ into scaffold for spinal cord
injuries, a strategy that is seldomly tried in spinal cord engi-
neering. The aim of this study was to determine if the chemi-
cally extracted acellular muscle could be a potential scaffold
for spinal cord injury. The chemically extracted acellular mus-
cle was implanted in the lateral hemisected adult rat thoracic
spinal cord. Control rats were similarly injured. After 1 and 4
weeks, scaffold integration and biocompatibility, axon sprout-
ing, and myelination were evaluated. The chemically
extracted acellular muscle scaffolds were found to be well
integrated with the host tissue. Sprouting axons grew into
the full length of the scaffold in a strikingly parallel and linear
fashion. A few remyelinated axons were also detected in the
scaffolds. The tracing results in another six rats showed that
labeled fibers entered the chemically treated muscle grafts.
Furthermore, there were no apparent quantitative differences
in the ED-1 and glial fibrillary acidic protein positive cells
between groups. Neuron counting showed more surviving
neurons in the acellular muscle treated group than those of
the injured only group. Vascularization of the grafts was also
confirmed. These findings clearly demonstrated that chemi-
cally extracted acellular muscle grafts provided useful
biomatrices to enhance axon sprouting in the injured spinal
cord. VC 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part A:
100A: 578–587, 2012.
Key Words: acellular scaffold, spinal cord injury, nerve tissue
engineering, nerve sprouting
How to cite this article: Zhang X-Y, Xue H, Liu J-M, Chen D. 2012. Chemically extracted acellular muscle: A new potential scaffold
for spinal cord injury repair. J Biomed Mater Res Part A 2012:100A:578–587.
INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord injury (SCI) often leads to permanent functional
deficits due to failed axonal regeneration at the injury site and
to the atrophy and/or retrograde death of axotomized neu-
rons.1,2 Despite the lack of spontaneous regeneration after SCI,
several experimental strategies have been recently attempted
and all have demonstrated significant axonal growth in rodent
SCI models. Such approaches include the provision of support-
ive substrates,3,4 providing neurotrophic factors to injured
axons5,6 and neutralizing inhibitory proteins at the site of
injury.7,8 Within these strategies, bridging strategies are essen-
tial to provide physical substrate allowing axons to grow
across the lesion site, because cavity formation and glial scar
are important obstacles impeding regeneration after SCI.
In recent years, various synthetic and naturally derived
materials have been used to construct spinal cord scaffold.9–11
These researches aim to mimic native extracellular matrix
that is the gold standard for tissue regeneration and have
provided promising results toward improving the function
of injured nervous tissue. However, because these
approaches have not provided the ultimate nerve regenera-
tion scaffold, the approaches reported previously require
further improvements to get higher similarity with extracel-
lular matrix, such as improvement in providing stimulatory
cues12 and optimization on scaffold internal architecture
design.13 Furthermore, these scaffold materials have their
respective disadvantages, such as degradation products that
are unfit for cell survival and axonal regeneration; much
poorer physical or biological characteristics; and low adhe-
siveness of cells. In contrast, acellular scaffolds that are bio-
logic scaffolds derived from decellularized tissues and
organs can effectively retain the structural and functional
proteins of extracellular matrix and their original three-
dimensional (3D) distribution. Till date, acellular scaffolds
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
*These authors contributed equally to this work as co-first authors.
Correspondence to: D. Chen; e-mail: nbumschendong@yahoo.com.cn or J. M. Liu; e-mail: liujiamei100@yahoo.com.cn
Contract grant sponsor: Chinese National Natural Science Foundation; contract grant number: 30970739 (D.C.)
Contract grant sponsor: Jilin Province Science Foundation; contract grant number: 20090726 (J.M.L)
578 VC 2011 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.
have been successfully used to substitute and repair skin,14
bladder,15 urethra,16 small bowel,17 cardiac valve,18 blood
vessel,19 skeletal muscle,20 and even much more complex
organs such as heart21 and lung.22 However, until now, few
acellular scaffolds have been tried for spinal cord repair.
In the present investigation, we have tried to use the
acellular muscle scaffold as bridging scaffold for SCI, which
can promote axonal regeneration in peripheral nerves.23
This is because (i) the basal lamina of acellular muscle con-
tains axon growth-promoting molecules, such as laminin
and fibronectin, and thus, acellular muscle can provide the
molecular guides for axonal regeneration; (ii) the basal lami-
nae of muscle fibers are long cylinders, similar to endoneu-
ral tubes, running parallel to one another, and thus, they
could theoretically provide physical guidance for regenerat-
ing axons; (iii) acellular materials have very low immunoge-
nicity, potentially allowing allografting or perhaps even xen-
ografting; and (iv) the acellular muscle is easy to prepare
and inexpensive. All these characteristics raise the possibil-
ity that the acellular muscle might be used in the repair
of SCI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and research design
Male Wistar rats were purchased from the experimental ani-
mal center of Jilin University. Animals were housed in a
standard cage and kept under standard laboratory condi-
tions (temperature at 22 6 2C; 12–12 h light/dark cycle).
All experiments were approved by the local Ethics Commit-
tee for Animal Research at Jilin University and performed in
accordance with international standards for animal welfare.
All surgical procedures were performed under anesthesia
produced by intraperitoneal injection with 10% chloral
hydrate.
Twenty-four adult Wistar male rats (250–350 g) were
randomly assigned to the two main groups: (a) chemically
extracted acellular muscle graft and (b) lesion only. These
two groups were all subdivided into two subgroups of six
animals each to be sacrificed on days 7 and 28. All animals
underwent spinal cord lateral hemisection. The treatment
consisted of application of chemically extracted acellular
muscle graft into the lesion gap which was left empty in the
lesion group. Histological examinations and ED-1 staining
for quantification of macrophages/microglia were performed
on all groups. In animals surviving until day 28, Holmes’ sil-
ver stain and neurofilament staining were used to detect
axonal sprouts. The sprouting axons in the grafts were
quantified. Given the dramatic axonal sprouting induced by
the chemically extracted acellular muscle, we decided to as-
certain other potential benefits of the chemically extracted
acellular muscle for grafting. Myelin basic protein (MBP)
staining was chosen to detect myelinated nerve fibers. The
biocompatibility of chemically extracted acellular muscle
graft with host tissues was further tested by analyzing
responses of astrocytes, neuron survival, and neoangiogene-
sis at the fourth week. To further test the origin of the
sprouting axons in the chemically treated muscle, fluororuby
(FR) tracing was used in another set of six rats treated with
the chemically extracted acellular muscle for 4 weeks.
Preparation of acellular muscle grafts
Wistar rats were killed by intraperitoneal overdose with
10% chloral hydrate (60 mL/kg). The paravertebral muscles
were excised, and bundles were longitudinally harvested.
The preparation of the chemically extracted acellular muscle
was based on a previously described procedure.24 Briefly,
the muscle segments were treated with a series of detergent
baths (Table I) consisting of Triton X-100 and sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS; all reagents from Sigma). All steps
were performed at 37C with constant stirring. Following
this, all samples were then sterilized using ampicillin (50
mg/mL) and stored in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at
4C until use.
After processing, longitudinal cryostat sections of the
chemically extracted acellular muscle were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin and examined by light microscopy.
Spinal cord hemisection and
transplantation procedures
Lateral SCI was induced as previously described.25,26 Male
Wistar rats weighing 250–350 g were anesthetized with
10% chloral hydrate solution (3.5 mL/kg). A laminectomy
was carried out to expose the thoracic spinal cord at T10.
Iridectomy scissors were used to make a right-sided hemi-
section of the spinal cord at the T10 level, followed by the
removal of a 2-mm block of the right-sided spinal cord
tissue. To ensure that all lateral spinal tissue had been
severed, a fine surgical blade was used to repeatedly scrape
along the ventral surface of the vertebral canal in the
lesional area. In the lesion only group, the lesional cavity
was left empty. In the treatment group, immediately after
completing the injury and achieving hemostasis, a graft with
its longitudinal axis parallel to that of the spinal cord was
carefully implanted into the cavity. To stabilize the scaffold
within the spinal cord, a piece of silicone sheeting was
placed over the scaffold and dorsal surface of the cord. The
surgical wound was closed layer by layer in all animals. To
prevent infection, rats received daily subcutaneous ampicil-
lin (100 mg/kg) and gentamicin (12 mg/kg) for a period of
1 week.
TABLE I. Preparation of Chemically Extracted Acellular
Muscle Graft
Reagenta Time (days)
Distilled water 2
3% solution of Triton X-100 in
Tris-buffered salts solution
2
Distilled water 2
0.1% solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in
Tris-buffered salts solution
2
Phosphate-buffered saline 1
a The volume of each reagent was at least 30 times greater than the
volume of the muscle samples.
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | MAR 2012 VOL 100A, ISSUE 3 579
Tissue processing
At the designated time points, animals were intracardially
perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. The region of
the spinal cord containing the injury and adjacent portions
were removed and postfixed overnight in the same fixative.
Then the tissue was soaked overnight in 15% sucrose
followed by 30% sucrose, and cut into 16-lm thick coronal
sections using a cryostat [19]. Every seventh section was
taken for hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry
The sections were immersed in phosphate-buffered sali-
ne(PBS) containing 0.1% Triton X-100 for 30 min. Nonspe-
cific antibody binding was blocked with 10% normal goat
serum in PBS containing 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA)
for 1 h. Primary antibodies including ED-1(a mouse mono-
clonal antibody specific for microglia/macrophages,1:100,
Serotec), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, a mouse mono-
clonal antibody specific for astrocytes ,1:100, Labvision),
neurofilament (a rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for neu-
rofilament in the neuronal axons,1:400, Millipore), and MBP
(a mouse monoclonal antibody specific for the myelin mem-
brane in the central nervous system, 1:100,Chemicon) were
applied for 12 h at 4C. Cy3-conjugated secondary antibod-
ies (goat anti-mouse, 1:400, Jackson Immunoresearch Labs)
or fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated secondary antibod-
ies (goat anti- rabbit, 1:200, Jackson Immunoresearch Labs)
were used to visualize primary antibody binding. The pri-
mary antibody was replaced by PBS for negative controls.
After staining, the sections were observed under a fluores-
cence microscope using appropriate filters.
For immunohistochemistry, the water-absorbed sections
were immersed in 3% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide for 10 min.
After washed with PBS, the sections were immersed
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.1% Triton X-
100 for 30 min, and incubated with serum blocking solution
(10% normal goat serum in PBS containing 5% BSA) for 1 h.
Primary antibodies including ED-1(a mouse monoclonal anti-
body specific for microglia/macrophages, 1:100, Serotec) and
S100 antibody (a rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for S100
protein, 1:100, Boster, China) were applied for 12 h at 4C.
After wash with PBS, the samples were treated with MaxVi-
sionTM HRP-Polymer anti-Mouse/Rabbit Reagent (Maxim,
China) at 25C for 15 min, and visualized with 3,3-diamino-
benzidine-plus substrate kit (maxim, China) for 5 min.
Silver staining of axons
For detection of newly formed axons (axonal regrowth)
entering the biomatrices or the lesion gap, sections from
animals which had survived 4 weeks were fixed in 10%
formalin followed by 70% ethanol and stained by Holmes’
silver stain,27 an axon specific staining method.
Tracing experiments
To further test the origin of the regenerating axons in the
chemically treated muscle, fluororuby tracing was used in
another set of six rats treated with the chemically extracted
acellular muscle for 4 weeks. One week before termination
of the experiment, after anesthetization, the rats underwent
laminectomy to expose the thoracic spinal cord at T8. A
total of 1.8 lL of 10% FR (10.000 MW; Molecular Probes)
were injected into the spinal cord 0.5 mm lateral to the dor-
sal median sulcus bilaterally, with 0.3 lL each at the depths
of 0.5, 1, and 1.5 mm from the pia matter by a 1-lL micro-
syringe. Seven days after labeling, the spinal cord extending
5 mm rostral and 5 mm caudal to the center of the injury
site was taken out and sectioned as described above.
Visualization of blood vessels
Four weeks after transplantation, sections from the chemi-
cally treated muscle group were stained for alkaline phos-
phatase, an enzyme present in endothelial cells of capilla-
ries.28 The slices were washed in PBS and then incubated
for 2 min with the substrate-solution (fast 5-bromo-4-
chloroindolyl-phosphate/nitro blue tetrazodium chloride,
dissolved in its special buffer). The sections were then
washed in PBS followed by ethanol dehydration, cleaned in
xylene, and mounted in synthetic resin.
Quantification of sprouting axons, myelinated axons,
macrophages/microglia, astrocytes, and neurons
The method for quantification of macrophage/microglia and
astrocytes in spinal cord sections was developed from pro-
tocols described elsewhere.29,30 Positive stained cells were
counted inside the lesion and in the adjacent white matter.
In the lesion group, cells were counted in tissue adjacent to
the central cavity; in the graft-treated cords, cells were
counted in tissue adjacent to but not including the graft
area. For macrophages and microglias, all positive cells in
six microscopic high-power fields (400) for each section
were counted. Five sections of each spinal cord at every
112 lm interval were separately analyzed and averaged.
The mean value from the combined data of all six animals
in each subgroup was calculated. For astrocytes, positive
cells were quantified by determining GFAP positive area as
a percentage of the total image area per microscopy field
with Image-Pro Plus, v. 6.0, and calculated in a similar way
with the quantification of macrophage/microglia.
Quantification of axons that had grown within the graft
was performed using methods described elsewhere.12,31
Briefly, two Holmes’ silver stained sections were randomly
selected from each animal. The total number of axons pene-
trating the scaffold was quantified at six microscopic fields
within each section at a 400 magnification. These quantified
fields were distributed within three regions of each scaffold:
the rostral region (200–400 lm from rostral host-implant
interface), middle region (between 600 lm from rostral and
600 lm from caudal host–implant interface), and caudal
region (200–400 lm from caudal host-implant interface). The
mean number of axons obtained from two sections of each
animal was defined as the number of axons. The number of
axons of six animals in each group was calculated.
To quantify the myelinated axons in the chemically
treated muscle, two MBP positive stained sections from
each animal were randomly chosen. Six microscopic fields at
a magnification of 400 times with most myelinated axons in
580 ZHANG ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE PROMOTES SPINAL CORD REPAIR
each section were counted and averaged. The mean number
of axons observed in two sections from each animal was
defined as the number of axons. The number of axons in six
animals from the treatment group was calculated.
For the quantification of neurons that survive 4 weeks
after SCI, six hematoxylin and eosin or silver-stained sec-
tions were used, about 200 lm apart and running cross the
gray matter. All the neurons within the area including and
extending 200 lm beyond the lesion site in each section
were counted. The mean value from the combined data of
all six animals in each group was calculated.
All values are expressed as mean 6 SD. Differences
between groups were analyzed by student’s t-test. A p value
of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Gross and histologic appearance
Following chemical extraction, the acellular muscle
appeared ivory, translucent, and displayed soft properties
[Fig. 1(A)]. In the chemically extracted acellular muscle, the
myoplasm and other cellular constituents were completely
removed from all muscle fibers, leaving uniaxial linear chan-
nels arranged in a parallel pattern [Fig. 1(B)].
After transplantation, inspection of acellular muscle scaf-
fold implanted sites revealed that lesion cavities were
completely filled with scaffolds (Fig. 2). The surface of the
scaffold was cohesive with the surface of the spinal cord,
and there was no sign of scaffold extrusion. At the micro-
scopic level, histological results were consistent with gross
images (Fig. 3). Connectivity between the stumps was
obtained. There was no scar tissue at both ends of the
implants. Scaffolds were infiltrated by numerous host cells,
such as ED-1 and S100 positive cells (Supporting Informa-
tion Figs. 1 and 2), and the implants integrated well with
neural tissue from both proximal and distal stumps.
Biocompatibility of acellular muscle with spinal cord
The biocompatibility of the scaffold was assessed by analyz-
ing responses of macrophages/microglia, astrocytes, neuron
survival, and neoangiogenesis surrounding or within the
scaffolds. The ED-1 positive stain showed that the numbers
of macrophages/microglia in the parenchymal tissue around
the cavity or graft area were slightly different between the
groups at 1 and 4 weeks (Fig. 4). However, the differences
were not statistically significant. GFAP staining results showed
that reactive astrocytes were present in all subjects at the
host/lesion interface. This GFAP reactivity at the host/lesion
interface did not differ qualitatively from animals of control
group (Fig. 5). It is noteworthy that some astrocytes pene-
trated into the scaffold in a linear arrangement parallel with
long axis of the scaffold. The staining for alkaline phosphatase
and the hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated that
FIGURE 1. Chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold. (A) Photo-
graph showing a chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold. Note
the transparent appearance of the scaffold. (B) Longitudinal section
of a chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold, hematoxylin and eo-
sin staining. The figure shows that all cellular constituents have been
removed in chemically extracted acellular muscle leaving parallel
tubules of extracellular matrix. Scale bar, 125 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 2. Photographs showing ventral views of the spinal cord with
(A) or without (B) chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold at 4
weeks after implantation. For the lesion control group, there is a large
cavity formed in the spinal cord. In contrast, the cavity is completely
filled with the scaffold in the acellular muscle treated group. The tri-
angle points to the graft area. Scale bars, 2 mm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.
com.]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | MAR 2012 VOL 100A, ISSUE 3 581
there were many blood vessels in the implants (Fig. 6 and
Supporting Information Fig. 3). Neuron counting showed
more surviving neurons in the acellular muscle treated
group than those of the injured only group (Table II).
Sprouting fibers after implantation of acellular
muscle scaffolds
The effect of acellular muscle scaffolds on neural fiber
sprouting following SCI was evaluated by silver stain analy-
sis. As a control for the silver staining, we performed the
staining at day 0 after transplantation. And the results
showed that no sprouting axons grew into the scaffolds
(Supporting Information Fig. 4). Four weeks after operation,
the Holmes’ silver stain results showed that many sprouting
axons grew into the acellular muscle scaffolds, which were
apparent throughout the complete length of the scaffolds
(Fig. 7). To further confirm the results of the silver stain, we
performed the immunofluorescence staining of neurofila-
ment. And the results showed that there were many axons
penetrating into the scaffolds (Fig. 8). The numbers of
sprouting axons were statistically different between the two
groups (Fig. 9). More strikingly, the sprouting axons were
distributed in a linear manner (Figs. 7 and 8).
The remyelination of the sprouting axons were visual-
ized by MBP positive staining. The results suggested that
some remyelination of ingrown axons had taken place inside
the chemically extracted acellular muscle graft (Fig. 10),
although the number of myelinated axons was few (only 6.2
6 4.0 per 400 microscopic field).
The sprouting axons after SCI may be derived from both
the spinal cord and the nerve roots.32 To further test if the
chemically extracted acellular muscle can promote the axo-
nal sprouting of spinal cord itself, fluororuby tracing
method was used. Results showed that fluororuby-labeled
FIGURE 3. Hematoxylin/eosin (H&E) staining of coronal sections from
each group. A, (a), and (b): Images of a section from the chemically
extracted acellular muscle treated group. The figures show that the
chemically extracted acellular muscle forms a tissue bridge between
the stumps of hemisected spinal cord. The scaffold is infiltrated by
numerous host cells, and integrates well with the host spinal cord.
There is no fibrous scar at the interface between the scaffold and spi-
nal cord. The broken lines mark the borders between the spinal cord
and graft. (B): Image of a section from the lesion control group. Scale
bars: (A) and (B), 625 lm; (a) and (b), 125 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.
com.]
FIGURE 4. ED-1 immunoreactivities in each group. (A1, A2) Images of
a section from the lesion control group at 1 week and 4 weeks post-
surgery. (A3, A4) Images of a section from the chemically extracted
acellular muscle treated group at 1 week and 4 weeks postsurgery.
The pictures show the ED-1 positive cells in the spinal cord adjacent
to the scaffold. (B) A quantitative comparison of the ED-1 positive
macrophages/microglia (n ¼ 6). There is no statistically significant dif-
ference in the numbers of ED-1 positive cells between the groups at 1
week and 4 weeks postsurgery. Scale bars: 250 lm. [Color figure can
be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
582 ZHANG ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE PROMOTES SPINAL CORD REPAIR
axons were observed in the acellular muscle scaffolds
(Fig. 11).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we tried the strategy that directly made the
extracellular matrix of the tissue or organ into scaffold for
spinal cord injuries. The results showed that the chemically
extracted acellular muscle scaffold was compatible with spi-
nal cord tissue. The current study also determined that after
SCI, the chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold could
promote axonal growth in a distinctly organized and linear
fashion. This distributed fashion may help to guide sprout-
ing axons into the spinal cord distal to the lesion site and
ultimately result in effective reinnervation of target neurons.
The interaction between the implanted scaffold and the
host tissue is an important aspect in using any biomaterials
in medicine. The cavities or cysts, which are caused by acute
trauma and form physical obstacles for axon regeneration,
structure rebuilding, and return of function, should be filled
and bridged by the scaffolds to restore continuity of the spi-
nal cord. The host cells should be able to migrate and infil-
trate into the scaffold to support axonal regeneration. In
this study, the acellular muscle scaffolds do not have fibrous
tissue encapsulation at the interface between the scaffold
and spinal cord, and they integrate well with the spinal
cord. The cavities or cysts are totally filled and bridged by
the scaffolds. Numerous host cells, including ED-1 and S100
positive cells, infiltrate and uniformly distribute in the scaf-
folds demonstrating the ability of acellular muscle to pro-
mote cellular migration into the lesion site. This differs
from many types of synthetic scaffolds, such as agarose,12,33
alginate,34 poly lactic-co-glycolic acid35 and poly D,L-lactic
acid (PLA),36 which leave relatively large cavities at the
interface between the scaffold and spinal cord, or prevent
host cellular migration resulting into the failure of host cell/
tissue bridge formation.
The data of this study also show that the acellular mus-
cle scaffolds have good biocompatibility with the host tissue.
The transplantation of acellular muscle does not evoke
upregulation of astrocytes, microglia and macrophages. Both
reactive astrocytes and activated microglia are characteristic
for the foreign-body reaction after transplantation in spinal
cord. In addition, the results of neuron counting show that
the scaffold does not cause additional damage to the spinal
cord and provides some degree of neuronal protection. All
FIGURE 5. GFAP positive astrocyte responses in each group. A and a:
GFAP-positive cells in the lesion control group. B and b: GFAP-posi-
tive cells in the chemically extracted acellular muscle treated group.
The asterisk indicates the graft area. C: A comparison of GFAP-posi-
tive area between each group (n ¼ 6). There is no statistically signifi-
cant difference in the GFAP-positive area between the groups. Scale
bars: (A) and (B), 250 lm; (a) and (b), 125 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.
com.]
FIGURE 6. Capillaries visualized by staining for alkaline phosphatase
in the chemically extracted acellular muscle on the 28th postopera-
tively day. The picture shows the capillaries in the graft area. The
arrows indicate the blood vessels. Scale bar, 250 lm. [Color figure can
be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.
com.]
TABLE II. Number of Neuron Survival (x 6 SD)
Groups Neurons/slide
Chemically extracted acellular muscle 333.47 6 80.24*
Lesion 285.47 6 83.16
* p < 0.05, versus lesion group.
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | MAR 2012 VOL 100A, ISSUE 3 583
these demonstrate that acellular muscle can be safely used
in the treatment of spinal cord injuries. The results shown
here are consistent with previous studies demonstrating
that acellular extracellular matrix scaffolds are tolerated
well by allogeneic recipients.28 In addition, the acellular
muscle are well vascularized after transplantation. This
result raises the possibility that the acellular muscle scaffold
may be applied in relatively long distance repair of spinal
cord injuries.
Following SCI, the local environment within the SCI area
is intensely inhibitory to axonal regeneration. Then one goal
of spinal cord engineering is to investigate a permissive
environment for spinal cord regeneration by providing a
combination of physical and chemical guidance cues for
extending neurites. Unlike some scaffolds, such as poly-b-
hydroxybutyrate37 and PLA,38 which may need adding addi-
tional stimulating molecules or cells to promote axonal
regeneration, acellular muscle itself, can promote axonal
regeneration. It has been reported that acellular muscle can
promote the axonal regeneration of peripheral nerve.24 The
walls of acellular muscle contain laminin, fibronectin, and
collagen.23 Laminin and fibronectin are well known to
enhance regeneration of peripheral and central axons.39 Sev-
eral synthetic scaffolds just incorporate them to enhance
the axonal regeneration-promoting effect.10 Collagen is a
major component of the extracellular matrix and can provide
physical support for cellular proliferation.40 It has been
reported that collagen fibers can promote the axonal regener-
ation and functional recovery after SCI.41 In acellular muscle,
these extracellular matrix molecules naturally combined with
each other in a 3D distribution which may provide physical
support and chemical guidance for regenerating axons. This
study shows that the sprouting axons can grow through the
FIGURE 7. Sprouting axons 28 days after surgery, Holmes’ silver
stain. A, a–e: Photomicrographs of a coronal section of the spinal
cord, including the chemically extracted acellular muscle implant, 4
weeks after the implantation. The figures show that sprouting axons
are present in the rostral, middle, and caudal area of the scaffold.
These axons are distributed in a strikingly parallel and linear manner.
The arrows indicate the sprouting axons in the graft. B: A photo-
micrograph of a coronal section in the lesion control group. The fig-
ure shows that there are no axons in the lesion cavity. Scale bars: (A)
and (B), 625 lm; (a) and (b), 125 lm; (c), (d), and (e), 62.5 lm. [Color
figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 8. Neurofilament positive axons in the chemically extracted
acellular muscle 28 days after surgery. Immunofluorescence was per-
formed by using the anti-neurofilament and fluorescein isothiocya-
nate (FITC)-conjugated secondary antibodies. The broken line marks
the border between the spinal cord and graft. The arrows indicate the
neurofilament positive axons in the graft. The cell body-like structures
are autofluorescent cells. Scale bar: (A), 250 lm; (B), 125 lm. [Color
figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
584 ZHANG ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE PROMOTES SPINAL CORD REPAIR
whole length of acellular muscle after SCI, indicating that
acellular muscle scaffold can create a permissive environ-
ment for spinal cord regrowth. And the degree of their axo-
nal sprouting is similar to that in some other extracellular
matrix scaffolds, such as fibronectin42 and collagen fibers.43
In addition, the silver staining results showed that the axons
from both proximal and distal spinal cord could sprout into
the scaffold. However, we did not find that the fluororuby-
labeled axons in the scaffolds were continuous with axons
in the distal spinal cord. Because we cannot exclude the
possibility that fluororuby-labeled axons in distal spinal
cord originated from the spared spinal cord, it need further
experiments to test if the axons can leave the graft and re-
enter the spinal cord.
The main rationale for the treatment of SCI is to pro-
mote the regeneration of injured axons and to guide regen-
erated axon to reinnervate the previous target neurons in
the spinal cord distal to the lesion site, as a result, to gain
the function restoration. However, although several experi-
mental strategies, such as the provision of neurotrophic fac-
tors to injured axons,5 providing supportive substrates,3 and
neutralizing inhibitory proteins at the site of injury,7 have
recently demonstrated that axonal sprouting can in fact be
significantly augmented, the growth is generally highly dis-
organized, preventing reconnecting of disrupted axon path-
ways with their target neurons. Within the skeletal muscle,
muscle cells are internally coaxially aligned. As a result of
decellularization, the acellular muscle has naturally multiple
linear channels which can provide topographical guide for
sprouting axons. Our results show that the sprouting axons
in acellular muscle are arranged in a linear pattern, indicat-
ing that the acellular muscle scaffolds can guild the
FIGURE 10. Sprouting myelinated nerve fibers in the chemically
treated muscle 4 weeks after transplantation, MBP positive staining. A
few myelinated nerve fibers are present in the chemically extracted
acellular muscle graft. The broken line marks the border between the
spinal cord and graft. The asterisk indicates the graft area. The arrows
point to the myelinated nerve fibers in the graft. Scale bar: (A), 250
lm; (B), 62.5 lm. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue,
which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 11. Fluororuby-labeled sprouting spinal axons 4 weeks after
chemically extracted acellular muscle transplantation. The broken line
marks the border between the spinal cord and graft. The arrows
indicate the labeled axons in the graft. The cell body-like structures
are autofluorescent cells. Scale bar: (A), 625 lm; (B), 125 lm. [Color
figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 9. The number of sprouting axons of each group (n ¼ 6).
*Significant difference in the numbers of regenerating axons (p <
0.05, t test). [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is
available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | MAR 2012 VOL 100A, ISSUE 3 585
sprouting axons in a controlled direction. This may help for
the reconnection of regenerated axons with their original
target neurons.
Several additional properties make the acellular muscle
scaffold useful for the treatment of spinal cord injuries. The
scaffolds are soft and flexible. The fabrication is easy and
the preparation costs are low. Based on the reduced immu-
nogenicity of acellular scaffold, there is the possibility that
acellular muscle could be used as allografts.
There is room to improve the acellular muscle scaffold
for the treatment of SCI. In this study, we did not find the
apparent functional recovery in chemical extracted acellular
muscle treated group 4 weeks after transplantation (data
not shown).This may be partly because only a few myelin-
ated axons formed in the scaffold.44 The formation of few
myelinated axons may be related to lack of sufficient proli-
feration and differentiation of oligodendroglial progeni-
tors.45 This problem can be overcomed by combining with
other myelin formation-promoting strategies, such as pro-
viding a source of neurotrophic protein.46 In addition, this
kind of strategy may further improve the capacity of acellular
muscle scaffold to promote the axonal regeneration after SCI.
CONCLUSIONS
Taking all these observations together, chemically extracted
acellular muscle provides a potential scaffold for spinal cord
repair, which combines several key features required for
axonal regeneration in the central nervous system.
REFERENCES
1. Profyris C, Cheema SS, Zang D, Azari MF, Boyle K, Petratos S. De-
generative and regenerative mechanisms governing spinal cord
injury. Neurobiol Dis 2004;15:415–436.
2. Himes BT, Liu Y, Solowska JM, Snyder EY, Fischer I, Tessler A.
Transplants of cells genetically modified to express neurotrophin-
3 rescue axotomized Clarke’s nucleus neurons after spinal cord
hemisection in adult rats. J Neurosci Res 2001;65:549–564.
3. King VR, Henseler M, Brown RA, Priestley JV. Mats made from
fibronectin support oriented growth of axons in the damaged spi-
nal cord of the adult rat. Exp Neurol 2003;182:383–398.
4. Yoshii S, Oka M, Shima M, Akagi M, Taniguchi A. Bridging a spi-
nal cord defect using collagen filament. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
2003;28:2346–2351.
5. Blesch A, Tuszynski MH. Cellular GDNF delivery promotes growth
of motor and dorsal column sensory axons after partial and com-
plete spinal cord transections and induces remyelination. J Comp
Neurol 2003;467:403–417.
6. Bradbury EJ, Khemani S, Von R, King, Priestley JV, McMahon SB.
NT-3 promotes growth of lesioned adult rat sensory axons
ascending in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord. Eur J Neuro-
sci 1999;11:3873–3883.
7. Schnell L, Schwab ME. Axonal regeneration in the rat spinal cord
produced by an antibody against myelin-associated neurite
growth inhibitors. Nature 1990;343:269–272.
8. Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, King VR, Bennett GS, Patel PN,
Fawcett JW, McMahon SB. Chondroitinase ABC promotes func-
tional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 2002;416:636–640.
9. Nomura H, Tator CH, Shoichet MS. Bioengineered strategies for
spinal cord repair. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:496–507.
10. Subramanian A, Krishnan UM, Sethuraman S. Development of
biomaterial scaffold for nerve tissue engineering: Biomaterial
mediated neural regeneration. J Biomed Sci 2009;16:108.
11. Willerth SM, Sakiyama-Elbert SE. Approaches to neural tissue
engineering using scaffolds for drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2007;59:325–338.
12. Stokols S, Tuszynski MH. Freeze-dried agarose scaffolds with uni-
axial channels stimulate and guide linear axonal growth following
spinal cord injury. Biomaterials 2006;27:443–451.
13. Madigan NN, McMahon S, O’Brien T, Yaszemski MJ, Windebank
AJ. Current tissue engineering and novel therapeutic approaches
to axonal regeneration following spinal cord injury using polymer
scaffolds. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2009;169:183–199.
14. Takami Y, Matsuda T, Yoshitake M, Hanumadass M, Walter RJ.
Dispase/detergent treated dermal matrix as a dermal substitute.
Burns 1996;22:182–190.
15. Sutherland RS, Baskin LS, Hayward SW, Cunha GR. Regeneration
of bladder urothelium, smooth muscle, blood vessels and nerves
into an acellular tissue matrix. J Urol 1996;156(2 Pt 2):571–577.
16. Parnigotto PP, Gamba PG, Conconi MT, Midrio P. Experimental
defect in rabbit urethra repaired with acellular aortic matrix. Urol
Res 2000;28:46–51.
17. Pahari MP, Raman A, Bloomenthal A, Costa MA, Bradley SP, Ban-
ner B, Rastellini C, Cicalese L. A novel approach for intestinal
elongation using acellular dermal matrix: An experimental study
in rats. Transplant Proc 2006;38:1849–1850.
18. Knight RL, Wilcox HE, Korossis SA, Fisher J, Ingham E. The use
of acellular matrices for the tissue engineering of cardiac valves.
Proc Inst Mech Eng H 2008;222:129–143.
19. Conconi MT, Nico B, Mangieri D, Tommasini M, di Liddo R, Parni-
gotto PP, Nussdorfer GG, Ribatti D. Angiogenic response induced
by acellular aortic matrix in vivo. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol
Biol 2004;281:1303–1307.
20. Marzaro M, Conconi MT, Perin L, Giuliani S, Gamba P, De Coppi
P, Perrino GP, Parnigotto PP, Nussdorfer GG. Autologous satellite
cell seeding improves in vivo biocompatibility of homologous
muscle acellular matrix implants. Int J Mol Med 2002;10:
177–182.
21. Ott HC, Matthiesen TS, Goh SK, Black LD, Kren SM, Netoff TI,
Taylor DA. Perfusion-decellularized matrix: Using nature’s plat-
form to engineer a bioartificial heart. Nat Med 2008;14:213–221.
22. Petersen TH, Calle EA, Zhao L, Lee EJ, Gui L, Raredon MB, Gavri-
lov K, Yi T, Zhuang ZW, Breuer C and others. Tissue-engineered
lungs for in vivo implantation. Science 2010;329:538–541.
23. Hall S. Axonal regeneration through acellular muscle grafts.
J Anat 1997;190 (Pt 1):57–71.
24. Mligiliche N, Kitada M, Ide C. Grafting of detergent-denatured
skeletal muscles provides effective conduits for extension of
regenerating axons in the rat sciatic nerve. Arch Histol Cytol 2001;
64:29–36.
25. Arvanian VL, Bowers WJ, Anderson A, Horner PJ, Federoff HJ,
Mendell LM. Combined delivery of neurotrophin-3 and NMDA
receptors 2D subunit strengthens synaptic transmission in con-
tused and staggered double hemisected spinal cord of neonatal
rat. Exp Neurol 2006;197:347–352.
26. Lee YS, Sindhu RK, Lin CY, Ehdaie A, Lin VW, Vaziri ND. Effects
of nerve graft on nitric oxide synthase, NAD (P) H oxidase, and
antioxidant enzymes in chronic spinal cord injury. Free Radic Biol
Med 2004;36:330–339.
27. Blest AD. Some modifications of Holmes’s silver method for
insect central nervous systems. Quart J Microsc Sci 1961;102:
413–417.
28. Sondell M, Lundborg G, Kanje M. Regeneration of the rat sciatic
nerve into allografts made acellular through chemical extraction.
Brain Res 1998;795:44–54.
29. Taylor SJ, Rosenzweig ES, McDonald JW III, Sakiyama-Elbert SE.
Delivery of neurotrophin-3 from fibrin enhances neuronal fiber
sprouting after spinal cord injury. J Controlled Release 2006;113:
226–235.
30. Pan HC, Cheng FC, Lai SZ, Yang DY, Wang YC, Lee MS. Enhanced
regeneration in spinal cord injury by concomitant treatment with
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and neuronal stem cells.
J Clin Neurosci 2008;15:656–664.
31. Guo J, Su H, Zeng Y, Liang YX, Wong WM, Ellis-Behnke RG, So
KF, Wu W. Reknitting the injured spinal cord by self-assembling
peptide nanofiber scaffold. Nanomedicine 2007;3:311–321.
32. Kataoka K, Suzuki Y, Kitada M, Hashimoto T, Chou H, Bai H, Ohta
M, Wu S, Suzuki K, Ide C. Alginate enhances elongation of early
regenerating axons in spinal cord of young rats. Tissue Eng 2004;
10:493–504.
586 ZHANG ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE PROMOTES SPINAL CORD REPAIR
33. Jain A, Kim YT, McKeon RJ, Bellamkonda RV. In situ gelling
hydrogels for conformal repair of spinal cord defects, and local
delivery of BDNF after spinal cord injury. Biomaterials 2006;27:
497–504.
34. Prang P, Muller R, Eljaouhari A, Heckmann K, Kunz W, Weber T,
Faber C, Vroemen M, Bogdahn U, Weidner N. The promotion of ori-
ented axonal regrowth in the injured spinal cord by alginate-based
anisotropic capillary hydrogels. Biomaterials 2006;27:3560–3569.
35. Teng YD, Lavik EB, Qu X, Park KI, Ourednik J, Zurakowski D, Langer
R, Snyder EY. Functional recovery following traumatic spinal cord
injury mediated by a unique polymer scaffold seeded with neural
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:3024–3029.
36. Patist CM, Mulder MB, Gautier SE, Maquet V, Jerome R, Oudega
M. Freeze-dried poly(D,L-lactic acid) macroporous guidance scaf-
folds impregnated with brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the
transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord. Biomaterials 2004;25:
1569–1582.
37. Novikova LN, Pettersson J, Brohlin M, Wiberg M, Novikov LN.
Biodegradable poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate scaffold seeded with
Schwann cells to promote spinal cord repair. Biomaterials 2008;
29:1198–1206.
38. Hurtado A, Moon LD, Maquet V, Blits B, Jerome R, Oudega M.
Poly (D,L-lactic acid) macroporous guidance scaffolds seeded
with Schwann cells genetically modified to secrete a bi-functional
neurotrophin implanted in the completely transected adult rat
thoracic spinal cord. Biomaterials 2006;27:430–442.
39. Sehrbundt Viale E, Brambilla M, Martelli A, Pau A, Viale GL. Mus-
cle basal lamina as a grafting material for elongation of axons
from rat brain. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1991;109:122–125.
40. Schonfelder U, Abel M, Wiegand C, Klemm D, Elsner P, Hipler
UC. Influence of selected wound dressings on PMN elastase in
chronic wound fluid and their antioxidative potential in vitro. Bio-
materials 2005;26:6664–6673.
41. Yoshii S, Oka M, Shima M, Taniguchi A, Taki Y, Akagi M. Restora-
tion of function after spinal cord transection using a collagen
bridge. J Biomed Mater Res A 2004;70:569–575.
42. Von R. King, Alla Alovskaya, Diana Y.T. Wei, Robert A. Brown,
John V. Priestley. The use of injectable forms of fibrin and fibro-
nectin to support axonal ingrowth after spinal cord injury. Bio-
materials 2010;31:4447–4456.
43. Qianqian Han, Wei Jin, Zhifeng Xiao, Hongbin Ni, Jinhuan Wang,
Jie Kong, Jun Wu, Weibang Liang, Lei Chen, Yannan Zhao, Bing
Chen, Jianwu Dai. The promotion of neural regeneration in an
extreme rat spinal cord injury model using a collagen scaffold
containing a collagen binding neuroprotective protein and an
EGFR neutralizing antibody. Biomaterials 2010;31:9212–9220.
44. Myckatyn TM, Mackinnon SE, McDonald JW. Stem cell transplan-
tation and other novel techniques for promoting recovery from
spinal cord injury. Transpl Immunol 2004;12:343–358.
45. Jiang S, Ballerini P, Buccella S, Giuliani P, Jiang C, Huang X, Rath-
bone MP. Remyelination after chronic spinal cord injury is associated
with proliferation of endogenous adult progenitor cells after systemic
administration of guanosine. Purinergic Signal 2008;4:61–71.
46. McTigue DM, Horner PJ, Stokes BT, Gage FH. Neurotrophin-3 and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor induce oligodendrocyte prolifer-
ation and myelination of regenerating axons in the contused
adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 1998;18:5354–5365.
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | MAR 2012 VOL 100A, ISSUE 3 587
