RESEARCH ARTICLE
Spinal cord regeneration i
i
o
as
te
rst
glo
2 d
at
and fish can regenerate their spinal cord after injury [2-4]. lost at the end of metamorphosis [9,10].
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13regenerative bud. Lineage tracing analyses have
demonstrated that skeletal muscle, spinal cord and
Chile, Alameda 340, Santiago, Chile
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleTherefore amphibians are an attractive model to under-
stand the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
spinal cord regeneration, and might provide valuable
knowledge and novel insights into understanding why
spinal cord regeneration is absent in mammals.
After tail amputation ependymal cells migrate to the
wound area sealing the damaged spinal cord canal tip,
forming a terminal dilatation lined by ependymal epi-
thelium. This structure is referred to as neural ampulla
or terminal vesicle [3]. Subsequently, the neural am-
pulla is alongside a bullet-like structure corresponding
to the proliferative cells from the notochord and undif-
ferentiated mesenchymal cells which give rise to the
* Correspondence: jlarrain@bio.puc.cl
1Center for Aging and Regeneration, Millennium Nucleus in Regenerative
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica deprocess. After spinal cord transection, Sox2 cells are found in the ablation gap forming aggregates. Furthermore,
Sox2 levels correlated with regenerative capabilities during metamorphosis, observing a decrease in Sox2 levels at
non-regenerative stages.
Conclusions: Sox2+ cells contribute to the regeneration of spinal cord after tail amputation and transection. Sox2
levels decreases during metamorphosis concomitantly with the lost of regenerative capabilities. Our results lead to a
working hypothesis in which spinal cord damage activates proliferation and/or migration of Sox2+ cells, thus
allowing regeneration of the spinal cord after tail amputation or reconstitution of the ependymal epithelium after
spinal cord transection.
Keywords: Spinal cord regeneration, Sox2, Xenopus
Background
In mammals, including humans, spinal cord injury (SCI)
results in loss of motor and/or sensory function below the
level of the injury, leading to paraplegia and quadriplegia,
both highly prevalent conditions with significant impact
on life quality. SCI results in a massive loss of local neu-
rons at the site of the lesion without neural regeneration
[1]. Unlike mammals, amphibians such as adult urodeles
(for example, newts), anuran larvae (for example, Xenopus)
Amphibian regeneration has been studied using two ex-
perimental approaches: tail amputation and spinal cord
transection. Tail amputation induces the regeneration of a
new posterior half of the tail containing spinal cord, skel-
etal muscle, notochord, fins, vasculature and skin [3,5,6].
After spinal cord transection both Xenopus laevis and sala-
manders can re-establish nerve tracts and achieve func-
tional recovery from paraplegia [6-8]. Interestingly, in
Xenopus this ability is restricted to the larval stages and isproceeds through activat
Marcia Gaete1,2, Rosana Muñoz1, Natalia Sánchez1, Ricard
Dasfne Lee-Liu1 and Juan Larraín1*
Abstract
Background: In contrast to mammals, amphibians, such
(for example, Xenopus) can regenerate their spinal cord af
mechanisms involved in this process are still poorly unde
Results: Here, we report that tail amputation results in a
cells. Overexpression of a dominant negative form of Sox
affecting tail regeneration after amputation, suggesting th
+© 2012 Gaete et al.; licensee BioMed Central L
Commons Attribution License (http://creativec
reproduction in any medium, provided the orOpen Access
n Xenopus tadpoles
on of Sox2-positive cells
Tampe1, Mauricio Moreno1, Esteban G Contreras1,
adult urodeles (for example, newts) and anuran larvae
r injury. However, the cellular and molecular
ood.
bal increase of Sox2 levels and proliferation of Sox2+
iminished proliferation of spinal cord resident cells
spinal cord regeneration is crucial for the wholetd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
ommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
iginal work is properly cited.
tail (Figure 1I-L and Additional file 1B,C). Cells in the
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 2 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13notochord regenerate from their own original tissues
on the regenerative bud [11], suggesting that tail re-
generation occurs through the activation of tissue-spe-
cific stem and/or progenitor cells. Accordingly, it has
been demonstrated that activation of muscle progeni-
tors, Pax7+ satellite cells, are required for skeletal
muscle regeneration, resembling cellular mechanisms
involved in homeostatic and reparative regeneration in
mammals [12].
Regarding spinal cord regeneration, lineage tracing
experiments have shown that cells contained within
500 μm of the spinal cord located rostral to the amputa-
tion plane are sufficient to populate the entire regener-
ated spinal cord [13,14]. Ependymal cells lining the
central canal rearrange after transection and seal off the
rostral and caudal stumps of the transected spinal cord,
and subsequently start to proliferate and migrate to fill in
the gap between both stumps [6-8,15]. This bridge of
ependymal cells provides the substrate for nerve fibers to
grow and regenerate a functional spinal cord [7,15]. In
addition, 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling experi-
ments have demonstrated that in urodeles, ependymal
cells are able to originate new neurons [6,8,16].
The SoxB1 family (Sox1, Sox2 and Sox3) of sex de-
termining region Y (SRY)-related transcription factors
is expressed in the epiblast and neuroectoderm during
development, as well as in neural stem cells and
neural progenitor cells (NSCs and NPCs, respectively),
and ependymal cells in the neurogenic regions of the
adult brain [17-19]. SoxB1 members block cell cycle
exit allowing maintenance of NSC/NPC identity and
self-proliferation during development and adult neuro-
genic domains [18,20-24]. In addition, Sox1 and Nes-
tin are upregulated in response to damage in urodeles
[25,26].
In the present work, we studied the expression of
Sox2 and the effect of the overexpression of a dominant
negative form in tail and spinal cord regeneration in
Xenopus. We found that Sox2+ cells are present in the
ependymal zone of the spinal cord of Xenopus larvae.
Tail amputation resulted in a global increase of Sox2
levels in the spinal cord, as well as proliferative activa-
tion of Sox2+ cells. Transgenesis using a predicted Sox2
dominant negative construct decreased proliferation of
spinal cord resident cells and disrupted spinal cord and
tail regeneration. These results suggested that members
of the SoxB1 family (Sox1-3) may be necessary for
proper spinal cord and tail regeneration. Furthermore,
Sox2 levels correlated with regenerative capabilities
throughout metamorphosis. After transection, Sox2+
cells lining the ependymal canal might migrate to the abla-
tion gap forming aggregates in order to restore the con-
tinuity of the spinal cord. These data support a model in
which spinal cord injury activates proliferation of Sox2+neural ampulla were ciliated giving further support to
their neural progenitor characteristics (Additional file
1D). After amputation, the rostral spinal cord contained
multiple layers of Sox2+ cells (Figure 1I,J) and somecells to allow the growth of a new spinal cord after tail am-
putation and the reestablishment of the spinal cord con-
tinuity in the ablation gap after transection.
Results
Sox2 expression levels increase in response to tail
amputation in Xenopus tadpoles
Ultrastructural studies have demonstrated the presence
of ciliated ependymal cells within a pseudostratified ven-
tricular layer in Xenopus larvae spinal cord [15]. To de-
termine if these cells correspond to neural progenitors,
we evaluated Sox2 and acetylated α-tubulin expression
using immunofluorescence on spinal cord cryosections
from stage 49 tadpoles. We found that cells in the epen-
dymal tube showed nuclear localization of Sox2, have
elongated nuclei and are ciliated, all hallmarks for neural
progenitors (Figure 1A,B; arrow). It is worth noting that
these results suggest a dorsal-to-ventral gradient with
higher levels of Sox2 protein in the ventral part of the
ependymal tube.
To study the expression of Sox2 during tail regeneration,
we evaluated the effect of tail amputation on sox2 mRNA
and protein levels. To accomplish this, we amputated stage
49 tadpole tails, isolated RNA from the tip of the regener-
ating tail at different days post amputation (dpa), and per-
formed reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis. Basal levels of sox2 were detected im-
mediately after amputation (0 dpa; Figure 1C). These levels
were upregulated over time after amputation (Figure 1C).
We observed a similar upregulation for Xenopus Brachy-
ury (Xbra) mRNA, although delayed when compared to
sox2 (Figure 1C).
To determine the specific localization of sox2 mRNA we
performed whole-mount in situ hybridization in regenerat-
ing tails. At 3 dpa sox2 was expressed in the neural am-
pulla at the distal tip of the regenerating tail (Figure 1D).
At 7 dpa, sox2 mRNA localizes in a cord-like structure
along the regenerated tail (Figure 1E). Sections at 7 dpa
showed that sox2 mRNA is located in the spinal cord tis-
sue (Figure 1F arrow and Additional file 1A).
In agreement with sox2 mRNA expression, whole-
mount immunofluorescence detected low levels of Sox2
protein in uncut tails (Figure 1G,H). A strong increase
in Sox2 protein levels and Sox2+ cells was detected at 4
dpa in the spinal cord rostral to the amputation site,
and in the neural ampulla at the tip of the regeneratingperipherical nucleus display delamination-like morph-
ology (see arrows in Additional file 1E). In summary,
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 3 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13tail amputation increased Sox2 protein and mRNA
levels as well as the number of Sox2+ cells in the spinal
cord.
Systemic upregulation of Sox2 levels after tail amputation
During sox2 expression analysis we observed that tail
amputation also upregulated sox2 mRNA levels in spe-
cific cellular structures located dorsal and bilateral to the
Figure 1 Sox2 is upregulated after tail amputation. (A,B) Immunofluore
and anti-acetylated α-tubulin (green) antibodies; a 20 μm Z-projection was
(blue). (B) Magnification of the inset indicated in (A). (C) Reverse transcriptio
brachyury (Xbra) mRNA levels at the tip of the regenerating tail indicating t
control. (D-F) In situ hybridization using an antisense probe against sox2 du
post amputation (dpa), sox2 was detected on the spinal cord and (D, inset)
at the level indicated in (E), arrow indicates sox2 staining in the ependymal
immunofluorescence with anti-Sox2 antibodies (red) before amputation (G,
in blue. (H,J,L) Pseudocolored intensities of Sox2 channel from (G), (I) and (K
amputation plane. Scale bars: (A) 25 μm, (D,E) 400 μm, (F-L) 50 μm.spinal cord (Figure 2A). These structures correspond to
neuromasts of the lateral line as demonstrated by the simi-
lar staining pattern obtained with the vital dye 2-(4-
(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-ethylpyridinium iodide (DASPEI)
(Figure 2B). A transient increase of sox2 expression was
also detected in the anterior lateral line and the olfactory
epithelial region at 3 and 7 dpa (see insets in Figure 2C-E).
At 21 dpa, sox2 mRNA returned to basal levels (Figure 2F).
scence of transverse sections of stage 49 tadpoles with anti-Sox2 (red)
made to detect cilia (arrow). DNA was counterstained with TOTO3
n polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of sox2 and Xenopus
hat sox2 is upregulated after tail amputation. EF1α was used as loading
ring tail regeneration of stage 49 tadpoles at (D) 3, and (E,F) 7 days
neural ampulla. (F) Transversal section of the regenerating tail at 7 dpa
epithelium. (G-L) Sagittal optical section of whole-mount
H) and at 4 dpa (I,J) rostral and (K,L) caudal regions. DNA was stained
), respectively as is described in the left scheme. Arrowheads:
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 4 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13This prompted us to investigate whether sox2 levels
in the spinal cord were also affected distantly to the
amputation site. Non-amputated larvae and larvae at
different dpa were fixed, cut 5 to 8 mm rostral to
the amputation site, and sox2 whole-mount in situ
hybridization was performed (Figure 2G). At 3 and 7 dpa a
transient upregulation of sox2 mRNA levels was found in
the spinal cord rostral to the amputation site (Figure 2H-
K, compare staining levels in the spinal cord indicated by
an arrowhead). Similar results were also obtained when
the levels of sox2 mRNA were evaluated by RT-PCR
on isolated spinal cord rostral to the amputation plane
(Figure 2L,M). Similar sox2 mRNA levels were observed
on isolated spinal cord during normal development at
stages 50 and 56 (see Additional file 1F). Therefore, tail
amputation resulted in a systemic upregulation of Sox2
in the spinal cord, the lateral line and the olfactory
epithelium region, as part of a general response of the
organism to tissue injury.
Figure 2 Systemic upregulation of Sox2 after tail amputation. (A,B) Ta
(top) and lateral (bottom) view. (A) sox2 in situ hybridization and (B) 2-(4-(d
staining to identify the lateral line. Arrowheads indicate the amputation pla
cephalic region of (C) non-amputated tadpoles, and tadpoles at (D) 3, (E) 7
and olfactory epithelial region that increase sox2 expression at 3 and 7 dpa
observed stump ends do not correspond to the original amputation. (G) D
hybridization in areas 5 to 8 mm rostral to the amputation plane from tadp
(indicated by arrowheads). Endogenous expression of alkaline phosphatase
expression on this tissue is non-specific. (L) Diagram depicting the experim
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of sox2 mRNA levels in isolated spinal cord indica
EF1α was used as loading control. Scale bars: (A,B) 400 μm, (C-F) 400 μm, (HTail amputation activates proliferation of Sox2+cells
The spinal cord from amputated larvae contains multiple
layers of Sox2+ cells (Figure 1I, J) suggesting that tail am-
putation induces proliferation of Sox2+ cells. To address
this possibility, BrdU and Sox2 double labeling was per-
formed. Non-amputated and amputated larvae at differ-
ent dpa were incubated with BrdU for 24 h, fixed at
different days post amputation and processed for BrdU
and Sox2 double immunostaining (Figure 3A). Colocali-
zation of BrdU/Sox2 in cell nuclei was detected by con-
focal microscopy on the amputation site and in domains
rostral and caudal to the amputation site (Figure 3B).
Basal levels of BrdU incorporation were detected before
amputation (Figure 3C-E and O). At 2 dpa, proliferation
of Sox2+cells in the spinal cord rostral and close to the
amputation plane was detected (Figure 3F-H and O). On
the fourth day of regeneration, approximately 20% to 60%
of the Sox2+ cells were proliferating (Figure 3I-K and O).
This was not only observed in the amputation region
ils from stage 49 tadpoles at 3 days post amputation (dpa). Dorsal
imethylamino)styryl)-N-ethylpyridinium iodide (DASPEI) vital dye
ne. (C-F) Dorsal view of sox2 whole mount in situ hybridization of the
and (F) 21 dpa. Insets show higher magnification of the lateral line
. Notice that after fixation, tails were removed from their base and the
iagram depicting the experimental set up for (H-K). (H-K) sox2 in situ
oles at different dpa. sox2 is present in the spinal cord at 3 and 7 dpa
in the notochord has been described previously [27] suggesting that
ental set up for (M). (M) Reverse transcription polymerase chain
tes that sox2 is upregulated in a rostral region during tail regeneration.
-K) 100 μm.
Figure 3 Tail amputation increases proliferation of Sox2+ cells. (A) Diagram showing the experimental set up to evaluate incorporation of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) after tail amputation of stage 49 tadpoles. Each box represents 1 day, red boxes indicate BrdU incubation (pulse)
and blue circles the day of tail fixation (chase). Tadpoles were incubated in BrdU for 24 h chased at different days post amputation (dpa). Then
they were processed for coimmunostaining against Sox2 and BrdU and analyzed as described in (C-P). (B) Diagram of the rostral, cut and caudal
regions analyzed in (C-O). (C-N) Sagittal optical section of whole-mount immunofluorescence against BrdU (green) and Sox2 (red) double
immunofluorescence from tails labeled as depicted in (A) and fixed at (C-E) 0, (F-H) 2, (I-K) 4 and (L-N) 7 dpa in the cut region (C-K) and caudal
region (L-N). DNA is stained in blue. During regeneration, an increase of Sox2+/BrdU+ cells was observed in the spinal cord and (I-N) neural
ampulla. Arrowheads indicate the amputation plane. (O) Graph describing the percentage of Sox2+/BrdU+ cells in the overall Sox2+ cells at
proximal, cut and caudal regions of spinal cord at different dpa. An increase Sox2+ cell proliferation was observed in all the regions mostly at 4 to
7 dpa. (P) Graph showing the percentage of BrdU+ cells in the spinal cord, notochord and mesenchymal cells at different days post amputation
quantified at the cut level. (O,P) The number of tadpoles counted for each point (n) is indicated above the bars. Scale bar: 25 μm.
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 5 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 6 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13itself, but also rostral to the amputation plane and in the
growing tail (caudal region, Figure 3O). This indicates
that amputation results in a global activation of prolif-
eration, in agreement with the systemic Sox2 upregula-
tion results. BrdU incorporation persists until 14 dpa,
when it first starts to decrease in the area surrounding
the amputation plane (Figure 3O). Interestingly, during
early phases of regeneration most BrdU+ cells of the
spinal cord were Sox2+, and Sox2-/BrdU+ cells only
appeared at 4 and 7 dpa (Additional file 2A). Although
these results showed that most Sox2+ cells start a prolif-
erative cycle it is not possible to discard that some of
the proliferating cells were Sox2 negative before damage
and then start to express Sox2 and enter into a prolif-
erative stage. Double staining of BrdU+ cells with prolif-
erating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) confirmed that
BrdU incorporation corresponds to cells entering the
cell cycle and not because of DNA damage (see arrows
in Additional file 2B).
Interestingly, at 4 dpa significant increase of BrdU in-
corporation occurs in spinal cord resident cells, and
only low levels of proliferation are detected in the noto-
chord and the mesenchyme surrounding the spinal cord
(Figure 3P). Only at 7 dpa BrdU incorporation in the
notochord and mesenchyme approach the levels observed
in the spinal cord (Figure 3P). In conclusion, tail amputa-
tion activates cell proliferation, being initially upregulated
in cells along the spinal cord, followed by notochord and
mesenchymal cells.
Overexpression of a dominant negative form of Sox2
impairs tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis
Transgenesis was performed to investigate the role of Sox2
in spinal cord regeneration. We used a predicted dominant
negative construct lacking most of the Sox2 DNA-binding
domain, fused to the glucocorticoid receptor (Sox2BD
(−)-human glucocorticoid receptor (GR)) to control nu-
clear translocation and Sox2 activity, by addition of ex-
ogenous dexamethasone. An effect of this construct on
other members of the SoxB1 family cannot be discarded.
This construct has been used to block Sox2 function dur-
ing early Xenopus development [20], and a similar con-
struct (Sox2BD(−)) reproduces the phenotypes observed
with a different dominant negative construct of Sox2
(Sox2EnR) [20,28]. To regulate Sox2BD(−)-GR transcrip-
tion, its expression was controlled under the heat-shock
(HS) inducible promoter (see Additional file 3A). F0 trans-
genic tadpoles were prepared using the meganuclease
method with either HS::enhanced green fluorescent pro-
tein (EGFP) (negative control) or a mixture of HS::Sox2BD
(−)-GR and HS::EGFP Tadpoles were raised until stage 42
or 49, heat shocked daily, and EGFP-positive tadpoles
selected for further analysis. In situ hybridization against
the glucocorticoid receptor showed that 95% (55/58) ofEGFP-positive tadpoles were positive for the Sox2BD
(−)-GR transgene (Additional file 3B).
To evaluate the effect of overexpressing this construct
on tail regeneration, F0 transgenic tadpoles, either HS::
EGFP (hereafter referred as EGFP) or HS::Sox2BD
(−)-GR HS::EGFP (hereafter referred as dnSox2;EGFP) at
stage 42 were tail amputated, heat shocked and incu-
bated with dexamethasone daily until 6 dpa. At this stage
95% of the EGFP tadpoles regenerated their tails with an
average score of 8.1. In contrast, dnSox2 tadpoles
showed disrupted tail regeneration and only 46% of them
regenerated the tail with a score of 3.6 (Figure 4A-G).
Furthermore, when dnSox2;EGFP tadpoles were sepa-
rated into groups of low, medium and high levels of
EGFP expression, the effect on tail regeneration was
dose-dependent, establishing a clear inverse correlation
between dnSox2;EGFP activity and tail regeneration (see
Additional file 3C). Interestingly, among 55 tadpoles ana-
lyzed, 89% (8/9) of those expressing dnSox2;EGFP in the
dorsal region of the spinal cord regenerated their tail
(see Additional file 3D), whereas only 18.2% (2/11) of the
tadpoles that express dnSox2; EGFP in the ventral region
regenerated (data not shown). This is in line with the ob-
servation that Sox2 levels are lower in the dorsal side of
the ependymal tube (Figure 1A). In conclusion, at stage
42 overexpression of the dnSox2 construct impairs tail
regeneration.
Inhibition of Sox2 or Sox3 levels during spinal cord de-
velopment in chick embryos promotes cell cycle exit of
neural progenitors [21,22]. Similarly, Sox2 deficiency in
adult mice impairs proliferation of NSC in the dentate
gyrus [18]. Hence, we decided to test the effect of the
dnSox2 on cell proliferation after tail amputation. The tail
was amputated in EGFP and dnSox2;EGFP F0 transgenic
tadpoles at stage 49, heat shocked daily, incubated with
dexamethasone and exposed to BrdU for 24 h until 4dpa.
BrdU incorporation levels were reduced in the spinal cord
tissue of dnSox2;EGFP tadpoles (Figure 4H-P). Remark-
ably, BrdU incorporation was also affected in the noto-
chord, but not in mesenchymal cells (Figure 4K,O).
Overexpression of dnSox2 at stage 49 only affected the
quality of the regenerated tails (a statistically significant re-
duction in the regeneration score), but did not have an ef-
fect on the percentage of regeneration (Figure 4Q).
Nevertheless, detailed analysis showed that the length of
the spinal cord was reduced in dnSox2;EGFP transgenics
when compared to EGFP transgenic controls (Figure 4R).
Spinal cord regeneration and Sox2 expression during
metamorphosis
It has previously been reported that spinal cord transection
of Xenopus laevis larvae at the level of the fifth body seg-
ment has different effects depending upon metamorphic
stages. Before metamorphic climax, larvae have the ability
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 7 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13to recover coordinated swimming and behavior, while at the
end of metamorphosis (stage 66), froglets lose this ability
[7,10,29]. In order to have a better model system to study
spinal cord regeneration, we set up spinal cord transection
in Xenopus larvae at different metamorphic stages.
To this end, we performed complete spinal cord tran-
section at the mid-thoracic level in anesthetized prometa-
morphic larvae (stage 50). As controls, larvae were sham
operated with an incision in the dorsal skin and skeletal
muscle, leaving the spinal cord unharmed. Transection
resulted in a complete discontinuity of the ependymal
canal, generating rostral and caudal stumps separated by
an ablation gap, with total disruption of axonal tracts
(Figure 5A,B and Additional file 4A,B). Functional recov-
ery of operated tadpoles was evaluated on a daily basis
for 8 weeks. After recovery from anesthesia, all larvae
had a ‘paraplegia’ phenotype (Figure 5E, see Methods for
a detailed description of each behavioral category). Tad-
poles were not able to move except for a reflex movement
of the head and oral tentacles when touched rostral to
the transection site (Additional file 5 and Additional file
6). At 15 days post transection (dpt), most animals
showed stimulated locomotion or circular swimming, in-
dicating a partial recovery of locomotion (Figure 5E, and
Additional file 7 and Additional file 8). Finally, at 7 weeks
post transection most have regained coordinated swim-
ming with a continuous anteroposterior movement wave
(Figure 5E, and Additional file 9). No paraplegia pheno-
types were observed in sham-operated animals, and few
animals died due to the procedure (Additional file 4C).
Functional recovery was analyzed concurrently with the
anatomical and histological condition of the spinal cord
during the regenerative period. Anti-acetylated α-tubulin
immunofluorescence and nuclei staining at 7 dpt demon-
strated a partial continuity of the ependymal canal, and
some axonal tracts are observed in the transected region
at least on one side of the spinal cord (Figure 5C). At 28
dpt the ependymal epithelium and canal showed almost
normal continuity and axonal tracts were re-established
(Figure 5D). One explanation for this regeneration is an
axonal regeneration-based mechanism, but we cannot
discard that reestablishment of the ependymal epithelium
may contribute to spinal cord regeneration after
transection.
Functional recovery after spinal cord transection was
also analyzed in premetamorphic animals (stage 54), and
at the beginning and end of metamorphic climax (stage 58
and 66, respectively). We found that while stage 54 tad-
poles are able to recover (Figure 5F), this capacity is
abruptly reduced after the onset of metamorphic climax at
stage 58 (Figure 5G). Furthermore, juvenile froglets (stage
66), which have concluded metamorphosis, completely
lack the ability to regenerate from paraplegia (Figure 5H
and Additional file 10, Additional file 11, and Additionalfile 12). Approximately 40% of the transected animals at
metamorphic climax stages died. This effect was not
observed in sham-operated animals (Additional file 4D,E),
suggesting that death is a consequence of the inability of
these animals to recover from spinal cord injury. From
these results, we envision that spinal cord transection of
Xenopus tadpoles at different metamorphic stages should
provide a robust experimental paradigm to understand the
molecular, genetic and cellular mechanisms underlying
spinal cord regeneration.
In order to understand the lost of regenerative capabil-
ities during metamorphosis, Sox2 and other NPC and
ependymal cell markers, such as glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), Vimentin and Nestin, were analyzed in
Xenopus larvae spinal cord at different stages throughout
metamorphosis. For this, larvae spinal cords were iso-
lated at different stages as described [30], homogenized
and analyzed by western blotting (Figure 5I-K). Interest-
ingly, western blot analysis showed high Sox2 protein
levels at stage 50, whereas a weak signal was observed at
stage 58 (compare lanes 1 and 2, Figure 5J), this is con-
comitant with the abrupt reduction in functional recov-
ery from spinal cord transection at stage 58 (Figure 5G).
Conversely, similar protein levels for GFAP, Vimentin
and Nestin were observed between stage 50 and 58
(compare lanes 1 and 2 from Figure 5J,K). However, all
these proteins were not detected in non-regenerative
froglet spinal cord (Figure 5J,K, stage 66 lane 3). Thus,
Sox2 protein levels showed a clear correlation with func-
tional recovery after spinal cord transection, suggesting
its possible relevance in this process.
Response of Sox2+ cells to spinal cord transection
It has been proposed that ependymal cells from the ros-
tral and caudal stumps are activated and migrate to the
ablation gap in response to spinal cord transection
[7,15]. Based upon this data, we decided to test the effect
of transection on Sox2+ cells. For this purpose, sham-
operated or transected stage 50 tadpoles were incubated
with BrdU for 2 days, starting at 2 days after surgery, fol-
lowed by fixation and BrdU/Sox2 double labeling in
horizontal sections.
In non-transected animals, Sox2+/BrdU+ cells were al-
most exclusively found in cells with elongated nuclei
located in the ependymal layer lining the central canal
(Figure 6A-D). As expected, we observed a robust in-
crease on BrdU+ cells in the tissues surrounding the
transection site (Figure 6E-H). Contrary to that, we
found a reduction in the number of Sox2+/BrdU+ cells
located in the ependymal canal at the transection zone
(Figure 6E-H). Interestingly, the total amount of Sox2+
cells lining the ependymal canal was also strongly
reduced, and its nuclear shape changed from elongated
to round (Figure 6, compare (F) with (B)). Although the
Figure 4 (See legend on next page.)
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 8 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13
air
or
ag
cti
GF
. d
in
ed
h
co
w
are
bo
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 9 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13number of total Sox2+ cells and Sox2+/BrdU+ cell de-
crease after transection, we have found that the ratio of
proliferating Sox2+/BrdU+ cells over the total number of
Sox2+ cells did not change in the ablation gap area and
tend to increase in the rostral region (Figure 6I-L) com-
pared to sham controls (Figure 6P).
Furthermore, the main histology of the tissue lining the
central canal was altered after transection. In non-trans-
ected animals, spinal cord cells are very well organized and
packed, with the ependymal canal lined by Sox2+ elon-
gated nucleus, followed by a layer of round nuclei that is
Sox2 negative (Figure 6D). On the contrary, after transec-
tion ependymal layer of elongated nucleus was reduced to
a one-cell layer of round Sox2+ nucleus, clearly observed
at the rostral level (Figure 6L,M). In transected animal
spinal cords, but not in those from sham-operated ani-
mals, many round Sox2+ nucleus, most of them BrdU
negative, were found distant to the central canal (see white
arrows in Figure 6M,N) meanwhile Sox2+/BrdU+ cells are
found in the ependymal epithelium or closer to it (see yel-
low arrows in Figure 6M,N).
These changes in the localization and morphology of
Sox2+ cells after transection, in agreement with their
proliferative behavior, suggest a possible role of Sox2+
Figure 4 Overexpression of a dominant negative form of Sox2 imp
predominant phenotype of regenerated tails in (A-C) enhanced green flu
regeneration) F0 transgenic tadpoles amputated at stage 42. (A,B,D,E) Im
(B,E) Higher magnifications from the areas indicated in (A) and (D), respe
and (D), respectively. (G) Graph showing the regenerative efficiency of E
the percentage of regeneration and black bars the score of regeneration
compared to EGFP. (H-O) 5-Bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation
4 days post amputation (dpa) and (J,N) DIC microscopy from tails depict
(P) Graph showing the percentage of BrdU+ cells in the spinal cord from
BrdU incorporation was diminished in dnSox2; EGFP compared to EGFP
tadpoles amputated at stage 48, a decrease in the score of regeneration
spinal cord length of dnSox2; EGFP transgenic tadpoles decreased comp
the tail width. (G,P-R) The number of tadpoles analyzed (n) is indicated a
(See figure on previous page.)cell migration from distant regions to the ablation gap
during spinal cord regeneration.
Sox2 staining was also performed in stage 50 tadpoles
at 11 dpt. A partially recovered central canal surrounded
by Sox2+ cells and some supernumerary canals were
detected in transverse sections (see arrow and arrowhead
in Additional file 13A,B). Horizontal sections showed
that Sox2+ cell aggregates were colonizing the space be-
tween the spinal cord stumps (see arrow in Figure 6O).
These results suggest that transection induces Sox2+
cells lining the ependymal canal to migrate into the abla-
tion gap. Although, we were expecting to see an increase
in the proliferation of Sox2+ cells, we found the opposite
result: a reduction in the number of Sox2+/BrdU+ cells.
We propose two possible explanations for these results: (i)
Sox2+ cells were activated very rapidly and DNAreplication occurred during the first 2 days after transec-
tion, before BrdU addition, or (ii) it is plausible that no
massive proliferation of Sox2+ cells is necessary and that in
response to injury, the cells lining the ependymal canal
change their shape and migrate, explaining the decrease of
Sox2+ cells in the ependyma.
Discussion
In the present study we explored the behavior of Sox2+
cells in spinal cord regeneration after tail amputation
and spinal cord transection of Xenopus larvae. Either
type of injury results in dramatic changes in Sox2+ cells.
Tail amputation results in increased levels of Sox2
mRNA and protein levels, and also in an augmentation
of the overall number of Sox2+ cells. This increase oc-
curred in spinal cord regions located up to 5 to 8 mm
from the injury site, but was also observed in the lateral
line and the olfactory epithelium region, indicating that
amputation induces a systemic activation of Sox2+ cells.
Overexpression of dnSox2 diminished proliferation of
spinal cord resident cells disrupting spinal cord and tail
regeneration. Moreover, Sox2 levels correlate with regen-
erative capabilities during metamorphosis and Sox2+ cell
aggregates repopulate the ablation gap after spinal cord
s tail regeneration. (A-F) Sagittal optical sections showing the
escent protein (EGFP; total regeneration) and (D-F), dnSox2; EGFP (no
es showing transgenic EGFP expression (green) and DNA (red) staining.
vely. (C,F) Differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy from (A)
P and dnSox2; EGFP stage 42 transgenic tadpoles. White bars represent
nSox2; EGFP tadpoles have a decrease of regenerative efficiency
(H-K) EGFP and (L-O) dnSox2;EGFP F0 transgenic stage 49 tadpoles at
in (H) and (L). (K-O) Magnification of the zone labeled in (I) and (M).
igh EGFP expressing transgenic tadpoles represented in (K) and (O).
ntrols. (Q) Regenerative efficiency of EGFP and dnSox2; EGFP transgenic
as observed in dnSox2; EGFP. (R) Graph showing that the regenerated
d to controls (EGFP). The length of the spinal cord was corrected by
ve the bars. Scale bars: 50 μm.transection. Altogether, these results suggest that Sox2+
cells contribute to spinal cord regeneration. This leads to
a model in which spinal cord damage activates Sox2+
cells proliferation and/or migration that will build-up the
spinal cord in the regenerating tail, or reconstitute the
ependymal canal after spinal cord transection.
In the transection model system, at 4 dpt a reduction
of Sox2+ cells lining the ependymal canal was observed,
concomitant with the emergence of Sox2+ cells in the
ablation gap at 11 dpt.
After tail amputation the main change of Sox2+ cell be-
havior is the increase of their proliferation and the total
number of cell that might allow the growth of a new epen-
dymal canal. In contrast, in the transection model, the
main mechanism of regeneration appears to be the migra-
tion of Sox2+ cells from distant regions to the injury site
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 10 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13restoring spinal cord continuity. In addition, in both mod-
els rostral Sox2+ cells appears to increase their proliferation
in response to injury, suggesting that distant tissues to the
lesion also participate in the regenerative process. These
suggest that although both processes are different some of
the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms are
similar.
Figure 5 Spinal cord regeneration and Sox2 expression during metam
acetylated α-tubulin (green) on horizontal sections from the injured area at
post sham operation (dps) that has coordinated swimming, (C) 7 dpt with
in (B-D) show 1.5 times magnifications of the areas contained in the frames
functional recovery of tadpoles transected at different metamorphic stages
undergoes. (I) Diagram depicting the isolation of spinal cord samples used
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), (K) Nestin and Vimentin at different stagRole of the spinal cord in tail regeneration
Intriguingly, overexpression of dnSox2 influenced the en-
tire tail regeneration program. These results suggest that
activation of Sox2+ cells is required for regeneration of all
tail tissues, instead of solely affecting the spinal cord where
Sox2 is expressed. Accordingly, we have found that induc-
tion of sox2 mRNA precedes the increase of notochord
orphosis. (A-D) Immunofluorescences of stage 50 tadpoles against
(A) 0 days post transection (dpt) with paraplegia phenotype, (B) 0 days
circular swimming and (D) 28 dpt with coordinated swimming. Insets
, which correspond to the transection levels. (E-H) Graphs showing
(st). Functional recovery decreases meanwhile metamorphosis
for J,K. (J,K) Western blot analysis of neural-related markers (J) Sox2,
es of metamorphosis. Scale bars: 50 μm.
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 11 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13progenitor marker (Xbra), and BrdU incorporation in
spinal cord cells is upregulated before than notochord and
mesenchymal cells do. Furthermore, overexpression of
dnSox2 primarily affects proliferation of spinal cord
Figure 6 Response of Sox2+ cells to spinal cord transection. (A-L) Tadp
days 2 and 4 after (A-D) sham operation or (E-L) spinal cord transection. Ho
(dps) or days post transection (dpt) were immunostained for BrdU (green),
rostral to transection zone. (M,N) Magnification of (J) and (L). White arrows
are indicated by yellow arrows. (O) Sox2 immunofluorescence on a horizon
gap that contains Sox2+ cells aggregates (arrows). (P) Analysis of the perce
represented in A-L. Sox2+ cell proliferation increase at the rostral level of thresident cells, but also influenced BrdU incorporation in
notochord cells (Figure 4O).
This apparent paradox could be explained if the re-
generation of the spinal cord is the initial step in tail
oles were incubated with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) between
rizontal sections from animals fixed at 4 days post sham operation
Sox2 (red) and DNA (blue). (E-H) Transection zone and (I-L) region
indicate Sox2+/BrdU- cells distant to ependyma, and Sox2+/BrdU+ cells
tal section from tadpoles at 11 dpt. Inset: magnification of the ablation
ntage of Sox2+/BrdU+ over total number of Sox2+ cells from samples
e transection site. Scale bars: (D,H,L) 50 μm, (N,O) 25 μm.
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 12 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13regeneration, and is hence required for proper regen-
eration of other tail tissues. This is supported by clas-
sical studies in axolotls where removal of the spinal
cord suppresses tail regeneration, while transplant-
ation of the spinal cord to a fin results in the forma-
tion of a tail with all its axial structures [31]. In
addition, detailed observation of the regenerating tail
in salamanders showed that spinal cord regenerates
before the other tissues [32]. Similarly, contact be-
tween the regenerating spinal cord and the wound
epithelium induces epimorphic regeneration of the tail
[8]. Recently, the spinal cord requirement was demon-
strated by studying the effect of surgical spinal cord
ablation in Xenopus larvae tail regeneration [30]. Our
findings now suggest that spinal cord regeneration, on
which Sox2+ cells are activated, is crucial for tail re-
generation in Xenopus larvae.
Xenopus tail regeneration proceeds via activation of
tissue-specific progenitor cells
Lineage tracing analyses have demonstrated that each
tissue in the regenerated tail originates from the same
tissue in the regenerative bud, suggesting that activation
of tissue-specific stem/progenitor cells is required
[11,13,14]. A role for Pax7+ muscle satellite cells during
skeletal muscle regeneration has been demonstrated
[12]. The high percentage of Sox2+/BrdU+ cells in the
regenerated tail and the phenotype obtained by overex-
pression of a dominant negative Sox2 construct might
imply that Sox2+ cells are the main source of cellular
progenitors required for spinal cord regeneration. Im-
portantly, this mechanism may resemble that involved in
homeostatic regeneration in mammals, supporting the
notion that Xenopus tail regeneration is an excellent
model system to study the biology of stem/progenitor
cells.
One intriguing observation is that systemic upregula-
tion of sox2 expression levels and activation of Sox2+
cells occur in response to spinal cord damage. It is pos-
sible that such a global activation of progenitor cells pre-
pares the whole organism to varying regenerative
demands. Several examples of tissues and stem/progeni-
tor cells responding at a distance to systemic signaling
activation have been described [33,34]. Identifying the
signals involved in such global activation is of great
interest for regenerative biology. Prominent evolutionar-
ily conserved candidates are members of the insulin fam-
ily. In Drosophila, insulin regulates ovarian stem cell
physiology and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is
required for global activation of neural progenitors in re-
sponse to focal cerebral ischemia in rodents [35]. How-
ever, whether insulin-like factors are responsible for the
effects observed here are open questions that need to be
addressed.Role of Sox2+ cells in spinal cord regeneration
Accordingly with the results on this work, brain and
spinal cord injury in Xenopus larvae [36], adult teleost
fish [37-39], eel [40] and urodeles [8,41,42] induce prolif-
eration of ependymal cells in the ventricular layer and
ependymal cells lining the central canal. While these
experiments demonstrate that nervous system damage
activates proliferation of neural progenitors in regenera-
tive model systems, they do not provide definitive proof
of the need for neural progenitors to achieve successful
neural tissue regeneration. Here, we demonstrated that
overexpression of dnSox2 reduces the proliferation of
spinal cord cells and impairs the proper spinal cord and
tail regeneration in Xenopus larvae, suggesting that
activation of Sox2+ cells is necessary for spinal cord and
tail regeneration. We observed a reduced effect on tail
regeneration at later stages that could be explained
because of the high levels of transgene mosaicism when
larvae are raised until stage 49. It is important to men-
tion that the dominant negative construct used could
also interfere with the activity of other members of the
SoxB1 subfamily including Sox1 and 3. Accordingly,
without experiments using a more specific tool it is not
possible to discard that the effects obtained could be
explained by interfering with members of the SoxB1
subfamily.
We envision that activated Sox2+ cells could mediate
spinal cord regeneration through at least two mechan-
isms: reconstitution of the ependymal canal via self-re-
newal of Sox2+ cells and/or through neurogenesis by the
formation of new neurons and glial cells. Our findings
suggest that Sox2+ cells are activated after SCI and divide
to regenerate the ependymal canal. The fact that new
neurons are produced in response to damage in zebrafish
spinal cord [37,43] and newt midbrain [42], together
with the existence of a secondary wave of neurogenesis
during metamorphosis to allow nervous system remodel-
ing [44], support the possibility that the production of
new neurons could play a role in spinal cord regener-
ation in Xenopus.
In addition to the mechanism described above, we
propose that Sox2+ cells can contribute to spinal cord re-
generation by a different mechanism. Histological ana-
lysis after spinal cord transection in Xenopus and
salamanders showed outgrowth and migration of epen-
dymal cells from the rostral and caudal stumps toward
the ablated gap, allowing the formation of an ependymal
bridge [7,8,15]. At the ultrastructural level, ependymal
processes and regenerating axons make contact, suggest-
ing that ependymal cells provide a pathway for axonal
growth and the consequent regeneration of the spinal
cord [15,45,46]. Similarly, Sox2+ cellular aggregates
found in the ablation gap at 11 dpt (Figure 6O) could
correspond to ependymal outgrowths that provide the
insufficient numbers of Sox2+ cells are activated in re-
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 13 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13sponse to SCI, thus making it impossible to reconstitute
the ependymal canal. Alternatively, these cells could be
activated as efficiently as at earlier stages, but because of
cell autonomous and/or non-autonomous changes dur-
ing metamorphosis, they are mainly fated to glia, and no
new neurons are produced. The latter is supported by
observations in rodents, where SCI induces rapid
proliferation and activation of Nestin-expressing neural
progenitors that differentiate into glial cells but not into
new neurons [50-53]. Only when neural progenitors
isolated from adult spinal cord are transplanted into a
neurogenic region on the adult brain is differentiation
into neurons observed [54]. A third possibility is that
Sox2+ cells are activated but they are no longer able topathway for axonal regeneration, and their ultrastructural
characterization requires future analysis. This scenario is
highly reminiscent of the formation of a ‘nerve bridge’
required to promote axonal regrowth after peripheral
nerve injury [47]. This is caused by the dedifferentiation
of Schwann cells to a progenitor/stem cell state and a col-
lective migration into the gap between the nerve stumps.
Sox2 is expressed in immature migrating Schwann cells
and is required for proper formation of the ‘nerve bridge’
[48,49]. Based upon these data, we hypothesize that Sox2+
cells migrate to the ablation gap allowing reconstitution
and continuity of the ependymal canal, as well as provide
a substrate for axonal regeneration in Xenopus larvae.
Loss of spinal cord regeneration during metamorphosis
Here, we have reintroduced spinal cord transection of
Xenopus tadpoles as a model system to study spinal cord
regeneration [7,9,10]. Xenopus tadpoles lose the regen-
erative capacity after metamorphosis, providing an excel-
lent model to identify the cellular and molecular
mechanisms responsible for regeneration. Western blot
analysis showed that Sox2 protein levels seem to de-
crease during metamorphosis and a strong reduction
occurs at the beginning of metamorphic climax (stage
58). This decrease is concomitant with a reduction in
other neural progenitors markers (Nestin, GFAP, Vimen-
tin) at the end of metamorphosis (stage 66) when the re-
generative capabilities are completely lost, suggesting a
possible role for neural progenitors in spinal cord regen-
erative capacity. Interestingly, at stage 58, peak levels of
thyroid hormone, the main regulator of metamorphosis
in Xenopus, have been observed [44], suggesting that T3/
T4 hormones can play a role in modulating Sox2
expression.
At least three hypotheses can explain the loss of regen-
eration after metamorphosis. One possibility is thatmigrate to the ablation gap to provide a substrate for
axonal growth.Therefore we believe that studies comparing regenera-
tive and non-regenerative stages in Xenopus tadpoles
should provide a fertile ground for identifying the under-
lying mechanisms that explain the loss of spinal cord re-
generative capacity. These studies should provide new
insights for the understanding of why mammals are not
able to regenerate their spinal cord and how we can ma-
nipulate them to promote and improve regeneration
upon spinal cord injury.
Conclusions
This study describes the expression of Sox2 during Xen-
opus laevis spinal cord regeneration after tail amputation
and transection. Our results demonstrate that Sox2+
cells, which have characteristics of neural progenitors,
proliferate after spinal cord injury. Overexpression of a
dnSox2 construct impairs tail regeneration decreasing
spinal cord cell proliferation, suggesting that the function
of Sox2 is necessary for proper regeneration. After spinal
cord transection, Sox2+ cell population colonizes the ab-
lation gap giving continuity to the injured spinal cord.
We support a model in which the Sox2+ progenitor
population is rapidly amplified after tail amputation to
regenerate the ablated spinal cord, whereas during spinal
cord transection this population may migrate to restore
the ependymal epithelium continuity. This hypothesis is
supported by the fact that spinal cord regeneration cap-
ability decreases during metamorphosis, while Sox2 ex-
pression and others neural progenitor markers decrease
as well. Further characterization of this progenitor popu-
lation behavior will give new insight into the mechan-
isms that govern spinal cord regeneration in amphibians.
Methods
Growth and manipulation of Xenopus laevis
Xenopus laevis embryos were obtained by in vitro
fertilization and cultured at 21°C in 0.1 × Barth (8.9 mM
NaCl; 102 μM KCl; 238.1 μM NaHCO3; 1 mM 4-(2-
hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazine-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES);
81.14 μM MgSO4; 33.88 μM Ca(NO3)2; 40.81 μM CaCl2,
pH 7.6) supplemented with antibiotics (100 μg/ml peni-
cillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin) until stage 46 [55].
Afterwards, they were raised in tanks (up to four tad-
poles/l) with chlorine-free aerated water at 23°C and fed
daily with Sera Micron until they reached the required
stage.
Tail amputation experiments were performed in Xen-
opus laevis tadpoles at stages 42 or 49 as described
[56,57]. Tadpoles were anaesthetized in 0.1% MS 222,
placed on a tissue-covered Petri dish, and amputated ver-
tically at the middle of the tail with iridectomy scissors.
Regeneration was assessed at 6 to 8 dpa by determining
the percentage of regeneration (% regenerated tails/total
amount of tails), and the quality of regeneration (mean
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 14 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13of individual tail scores). A score of 10 was assigned to
total regeneration (straight tails containing all of the
main tail tissues), 5 to partial regeneration (crooked tails
or lack of some of the main tissues) and 0 to no regener-
ation (rounded stumps with no evidence of new elon-
gated tissues) [56]. Percentages of regeneration were
analyzed using the χ2 test. For regeneration score the
Mann Withney or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by
Dunn’s multiple comparison post test were used. Vital
dye was achieved by incubation on DASPEI 1 mM.
For spinal cord transection, tadpoles and froglets were
anesthetized in 0.1% MS222, placed on an inverted Petri
dish covered by gauze. Dorsal tissue was incised in the
middle of the thoracic segment until the spinal cord
plane was reached. The exposed spinal cord tissue was
cross-sectioned using iridectomy scissors. Tissue planes
were then relocated at their corresponding place and
compression was made until clot formation. For sham
operation, only skin and muscle tissues were injured. In
froglets, where vertebrae are ossified, spinal cord was
accessed throughout the intervertebral discs and
complete spinal cord transection was confirmed check-
ing free-end stumps with a hook. Animals were trans-
ferred to tanks containing 0.1 × Barth supplemented with
antibiotics, and fed daily. Operated froglets were kept in
tanks taking care that the water did not cover the frogs’
heads to avoid drowning.
Animal behavior was classified into the following cat-
egories: (i) paraplegia: lack of movement caudal to the
transection site (Additional file 6 and Additional file 11,
compare to Additional file 5 and Additional file 10), (ii)
stimulated locomotion: spatial displacement after touch-
ing the animal caudally to the transection site (Additional
file 7), (iii) circular swimming: spontaneous locomotion
in circles (Additional file 8) and (iv) coordinated swim-
ming: spontaneous swimming in coordinated corporal
waves (Additional file 9).
In situ hybridization and immunofluorescence
Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed as
described [58] with minor modifications: anti-digoxi-
genin antibody dilution was used at 1:5,000, and tadpoles
at stage 42 and 49 were incubated with proteinase K for
10 and 15 minutes, respectively. Tails after whole-mount
in situ hybridizations were embedded in Epon and sec-
tioned in ultramicrotome at 3 μm.
The following antibodies or reagents were used: rabbit
polyclonal anti-Sox2 (1:200 for sections and 1:500 for
whole-mount, (Cell Signalling 2748s), mouse monoclo-
nal anti-acetylated α-tubulin (1:1,000, Sigma T7451),
mouse monoclonal anti-BrdU (1:500, Sigma, B2531),
AlexaFluorW 488 or 555 (1:500). DNA was stained with
TOTO3 in all samples (1:1,000, Molecular Probes
T3604).When working with sections, samples were fixed in 4%
PFA for 2 to 3 h at room temperature and (i) cryopro-
tected in 20% sucrose, embedded in optimal cutting
temperature (OCT) compound, frozen and sectioned at
15 μm, or (ii) embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 15 μm
and mounted on silanized slides. For morphology ana-
lysis, sections were stained with hematoxylin/safranine.
To perform cryosection immunofluoresence, samples
were rehydrated in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
blocked for 1 h in 5% fish gelatin, incubated on primary
and secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature in
the same blocking solution, washed for 10 minutes after
each antibody incubation, and followed by DNA staining
and mounting. For paraffin section immunofluorescence,
samples were permeabilized for 10 minutes in PBS con-
taining 0.2% Triton X-100, blocking for 1 h In PBS con-
taining 0.1% Tween 20 and 10% goat serum, incubated
overnight at 4°C with primary antibody diluted in the
same blocking solution; washed for 10 minutes in PBS
containing 0.1% Tween 20, incubated with secondary
antibody for 2 h at room temperature, washed similar to
above followed by DNA staining and mounting.
For proliferation assays, BrdU was added to the culture
medium to a final concentration of 400 μM for the indi-
cated times (see Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6). Double labeling
for Sox2 and BrdU was performed as follows. Tails were
fixed in 4% PFA 3 h at RT, permeabilized for 45 minutes
in PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (PBS-Tr), incu-
bated in 0.25% trypsin for 15 minutes on ice, and with
4 M HCl for 20 minutes, washed in PBS-Tr and incu-
bated in blocking solution (PBS-Tr containing 10% goat
serum and 1% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)). Samples were
incubated with both antibodies against Sox2 and BrdU in
blocking solution for 2 h at room temperature, and
washed for 2 h in PBS-Tr. The same incubations were
made for secondary antibodies. For whole-mount im-
munofluorescence against Sox2 and acetylated α-tubulin,
a similar protocol was used, although the HCl treatment
was omitted. BrdU immunofluorescence on cryosections
was performed as described [36] incubating with Sox2
and BrdU primary antibodies at the same time.
For DNA staining, sections were incubated for 10 min-
utes in TOTO3, and whole mounts were permeabilized
in 1%Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature, followed
by incubation with TOTO3 1:1,000 for 40 to 60 minutes.
Samples were photographed using fluorescence and
differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy on a
confocal microscope (FV-1000 Olympus Confocal Laser
Scanning Microscope). Intensity was measured using Z-
plot analysis and fire LUT pseudocoloring of ImageJ
(NIH). Total cell counting, including quantification of
colocalization, was performed using the ImageJ (NIH)
cell counter plugin. On tail regeneration cell counting
was made in an area of 133 μm2 in one focal plane for
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 15 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13each sample. On transection experiments an area of
200 μm2 from three to five spinal cord sections was
quantified. Results for intensity were analyzed by two-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni post
hoc test, where as cell counting were analyzed by one-
way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test. Error bars in all
figures are SEM. *P <0.05, **P <0.01, and ***P <0.001.
RT-PCR and western blot
Total RNA was prepared from 1 mm of the distal tip of
the regenerating tail (n= 10–12), or isolated spinal cord
(n= 20). Samples were incubated in TRIzol RNA isolation
reagent (Invitrogen) and RNA was isolated following the
manufacturer procedure. cDNA was synthesized using M-
MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega). Sox2 primers were
Fw 5′-CCACACGCCGCCTCGATGT-3′ and Rv 5′-TC
AGCCCCCAGCCTCTTGC-3′[59]; Xbra primers were
Fw 5′-GCTGGAAGTATGTGAATGGAG-3′ and Rv 5′-T
TAAGTGCTGTAATCTCTTCA-3′ [60] and EF1α pri-
mers were Fw 5-CCTGAACCACCCAGGCCAGATT
GGTG-3′and Fw 5-GAGGGTAGTCAGAGAAGCTCTC
CACG-3′. RT-PCRs in regenerating tails were performed
three times using independent replicates, representative
results were included in figures. Western blotting was per-
formed as described [30]. In all, 15 μg of protein extracted
from spinal cords at stages 50, 58 and 66 were loaded. Pri-
mary antibodies against Nestin and Vimentin (Rat401 and
14 h7, DSHB) were diluted 1:500, whereas anti-GFAP (N-
18 sc6171, Santa Cruz) and anti-tubulin were diluted 1:500
and 1:200,000 respectively.
Transgene constructs and transgenesis
In order to make the construct pSceI-heat shock protein
70 (HSP70)-SOX2 BD(−) GR emaglutinin epitope (HA), a
PCR fragment was amplified from pSP64T-SOX2 BD(−)
GR-HA (a kind gift from Y Sasai) [20], containing the 5′
end to the internal BamHI site, and then subcloned into
pGEMT-easy. Then, to reconstitute the complete Sox2
construct, a restriction fragment BamHI to SalI from
pSP64T-SOX2 BD(−) GR HA was ligated into the
pGEMT-easy vector containing the 5′ region of Sox2. Fi-
nally, the complete SOX2 BD(−)GR-HA cassette was dir-
ectionally cloned into EcoRV/SalI sites of pISceI-HSP70
[57] downstream of the HSP70 promoter to obtain pISceI-
HSP70::SOX2 BD(−) GR HA.
Transgenesis was performed using the ISceI meganu-
clease protocol [57,61]. One-cell stage embryos were
injected with a mixture of 50 pg each of pISceI HSP70::
SOX2 BD(−) GR HA and pISceI HSP70::EGFP, or with
100 pg of pISceI HSP70::EGFP for controls. Embryos
were incubated until the four-cell stage at 12°C, and
changed afterwards to 16°C. At stage 42 or 49, tails were
amputated, and tadpoles (EGFP and EGFP;dnSox2) were
heat shocked daily (30 minutes at 34°C) and treated with10 μM dexamethasone. Both treatments, the heat shock
and dexamethasone incubation did not generate signifi-
cant changes in the regeneration compared to untreated
wild types (data not shown). EGFP expression was classi-
fied as low when fluorescence was observe in less than
half of spinal cord, medium when about half of spinal
cord tissue has EGFP expression and high when EGFP-
positive tissue was predominant.
Additional files
Additional file 1 Sox2 levels are upregulated after tail amputation.
(A) Ultramicrotome sagittal section of 7 dpa tails analyzed by sox2 in situ
hybridization, safranine counterstain. sox2 is detected in the spinal cord
(SC). Notochord is indicated (NC). Arrowheads: amputation plane. (B,C)
Quantification of Sox2 (B) immunofluorescence intensity and (C) Sox2+
cells number in different regions of the amputated tadpole over the total
number of cells in the spinal cord. (D,E) Immunofluorescence against (D)
acetylated α-tubulin (green) in the ampulla region at 4 dpa, cilia are
observed (arrow). (E) Immunofluorescence against Sox2 in the rostral
region. Inset shows Sox2+ nuclei with delamination morphology. DNA
was stained in blue in D and E. (F) RT-PCR analysis of sox2 mRNA levels
from isolated spinal cord of non-amputated tadpoles. Similar levels were
found at stage 50 and 56. EF1α was used as loading control. Scale bars A:
100 μm; D,E: 50 μm.
Additional file 2 Cell proliferation during tail regeneration. (A)
Percentage of Sox2+ and Sox2- cells that incorporated BrdU in the
regenerated tail evaluated at cut level. Most of the BrdU incorporating
cells were Sox2+. (B) BrdU (green) and PCNA (red) immunofluorescence
on transversal sections of the regenerated tissue in tails at 6dpa.
Examples of double positive cells are indicated by arrows. DNA was
stained in blue. The number of samples (n) is indicated above the bars.
Scale bar: 50 μm.
Additional file 3 Overexpression of a dominant negative form of
Sox2 impairs tail regeneration. (A) Scheme of transgenic tadpoles
generation. One-cell embryo was injected with the EGFP alone or plus
dnSox2 vector (EGFP; dnSox2), raised until tadpole-stage, tail amputated
and exposed to heat-shock (HS) and dexamethasone incubation (DEX).
Sequences in the vectors are: restriction sites for the I-SceI meganuclease
(I-SceI), Xenopus HSP70 promoter, human glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
hemaglutinin epitope (HA) and EGFP. (B) in situ hybridization of EGFP
positive transgenic tadpoles using a GR antisense probe, most of dnSox2;
EGFP transgenics were positive for GR detection in contrast to EGFP
transgenic tails that were negative for GR. (C) Transgenic tadpoles were
classified in three classes (low, medium, high) based on estimation of
EGFP expression (see Methods). White bars correspond to percentage of
regeneration and black bars to score of regeneration. The efficiency of
regeneration of dnSox2; EGFP tadpoles decreased according as EGFP
expression increase. Number of tadpoles analyzed (n) is indicated above
the bars. (D) Total regeneration phenotype from transgenic tadpoles
expressing dnSox2; EGFP mainly in the dorsal side of the spinal cord.
Scale bars: 50 μm.
Additional file 4 Histology of spinal cord transection. Complete
spinal cord transection was performed in Xenopus laevis at stage 50, 58
and 60. (A,B) Histological appearance was evaluated staining sagittal
sections of injured area at stage 50 with hematoxylin/safranin. Lost of
continuity is observed at (A) 4dpt compared to (B) sham control. (C,D,E)
Phenotype of the sham-operated controls at (C) stage 50, (D) 58 and (E)
66. Scale bar: 100 μm.
Additional file 5: Movie 1 Tadpole - wild type.
Additional file 6: Movie 2 Tadpole - paraplegia.
Additional file 7: Movie 3 Tadpole - stimulated locomotion.Additional file 8: Movie 4 Tadpole - circular swimming.
Additional file 9: Movie 5 Tadpole - coordinated swimming.
ablation in larval Xenopus laevis. Acta Embryol Morphol Exp 5:109–129
8. Chernoff EA, Stocum DL, Nye HL, Cameron JA (2003) Urodele spinal cord
(2008) Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish. J Neurosci
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 16 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/13regeneration and related processes. Dev Dyn 226:295–307
9. Forehand CJ, Farel PB (1982) Anatomical and behavioral recovery from the
effects of spinal cord transection: dependence on metamorphosis in
anuran larvae. J Neurosci 2:654–652
10. Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC, Lopate G (1990) Metamorphosis alters the
response to spinal cord transection in Xenopus laevis frogs. J Neurobiol
21:1108–1122
11. Gargioli C, Slack JM (2004) Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 131:2669–2679
12. Chen Y, Lin G, Slack JM (2006) Control of muscle regeneration in the
Xenopus tadpole tail by Pax7. Development 133:2303–2313
13. Lin G, Chen Y, Slack JM (2007) Regeneration of neural crest derivatives inAdditional file 10: Movie 6 Froglet - wild type.
Additional file 11: Movie 7 Froglet - paraplegia at 0dpt.
Additional file 12: Movie 8 Froglet - paraplegia at 36dpt.
Additional file 13 Sox2 expression during spinal cord regeneration
after transection. Sox2 (red) immunofluorescence on transversal section
at 11dpt in the ablation gap area. DNA was stained in blue. Sox2+ cells
appear to form a main (arrow) and a supernumerary (arrowhead)
ependymal canal. Scale bar: 25 μm.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr O Wessely for critical reading of the manuscript, Dr F Court for
reminding us about spinal cord transection in Xenopus and M Farías for
technical assistance. We thank Dr Y Sasai for constructs. MG was a CONICYT
PhD fellow. This work was funded by: Beca de Apoyo a la Realización de
Tesis Doctoral no. 24081047 (MG); Inserción de Nuevos Investigadores en la
Academia 79090027 (RM); FONDECYT 11100348 (MM); Millennium Nucleus
for Regenerative Biology P07-011-F and Basal funding PFB12/2007 (JL).
Author details
1Center for Aging and Regeneration, Millennium Nucleus in Regenerative
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Alameda 340, Santiago, Chile. 2Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Alameda 340, Santiago, Chile.
Authors’ contributions
MG performed most of the experiments. RM, NS, RT, EGC and DLL carried
out specific experiments. MG and RM did the preparation of figures. MG and
JL conceived the study, made the interpretation of data and wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 29 December 2011 Accepted: 26 April 2012
Published: 26 April 2012
References
1. Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH (2006) Therapeutic interventions after spinal
cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:628–643
2. Becker CG, Lieberoth BC, Morellini F, Feldner J, Becker T, Schachner M (2004)
L1.1 is involved in spinal cord regeneration in adult zebrafish. J Neurosci
24:7837–7842
3. Slack JM, Lin G, Chen Y (2008) The Xenopus tadpole: a new model for
regeneration research. Cell Mol Life Sci 65:54–63
4. Tanaka EM, Ferretti P (2009) Considering the evolution of regeneration in
the central nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:713–723
5. Tseng AS, Levin M (2008) Tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis as a model
for understanding tissue repair. J Dent Res 87:806–816
6. Ferretti P, Zhang F, O’Neill P (2003) Changes in spinal cord regenerative
ability through phylogenesis and development: lessons to be learnt. Dev
Dyn 226:245–256
7. Filoni S, Bosco L, Cioni C (1984) Reconstitution of the spinal cord afterthe Xenopus tadpole tail. BMC Dev Biol 7:5614. McHedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzerow A, Tanaka EM (2007) A clonal
analysis of neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration
reveals evidence for both spatially restricted and multipotent
progenitors. Development 134:2083–2093
15. Michel ME, Reier PJ (1979) Axonal-ependymal associations during early
regeneration of the transected spinal cord in Xenopus laevis tadpoles.
J Neurocytol 8:529–548
16. Benraiss A, Arsanto JP, Coulon J, Thouveny Y (1999) Neurogenesis during
caudal spinal cord regeneration in adult newts. Dev Genes Evol 209:363–369
17. Avilion AA, Nicolis SK, Pevny LH, Perez L, Vivian N, Lovell-Badge R (2003)
Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend on SOX2
function. Genes Dev 17:126–140
18. Ferri AL, Cavallaro M, Braida D, Di Cristofano A, Canta A, Vezzani A,
Ottolenghi S, Pandolfi PP, Sala M, DeBiasi S, Nicolis SK (2004) Sox2
deficiency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the
adult mouse brain. Development 131:3805–3819
19. Zappone MV, Galli R, Catena R, Meani N, De Biasi S, Mattei E, Tiveron C,
Vescovi AL, Lovell-Badge R, Ottolenghi S, Nicolis SK (2000) Sox2 regulatory
sequences direct expression of a (beta)-geo transgene to telencephalic
neural stem cells and precursors of the mouse embryo, revealing
regionalization of gene expression in CNS stem cells. Development
127:2367–2382
20. Kishi M, Mizuseki K, Sasai N, Yamazaki H, Shiota K, Nakanishi S, Sasai Y (2000)
Requirement of Sox2-mediated signaling for differentiation of early
Xenopus neuroectoderm. Development 127:791–800
21. Bylund M, Andersson E, Novitch BG, Muhr J (2003) Vertebrate neurogenesis
is counteracted by Sox1-3 activity. Nat Neurosci 6:1162–1168
22. Graham V, Khudyakov J, Ellis P, Pevny L (2003) SOX2 functions to maintain
neural progenitor identity. Neuron 39:749–765
23. Suh H, Consiglio A, Ray J, Sawai T, D’Amour KA, Gage FH (2007) In vivo fate
analysis reveals the multipotent and self-renewal capacities of Sox2+
neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 1:515–528
24. Favaro R, Valotta M, Ferri AL, Latorre E, Mariani J, Giachino C, Lancini C,
Tosetti V, Ottolenghi S, Taylor V, Nicolis SK (2009) Hippocampal
development and neural stem cell maintenance require Sox2-dependent
regulation of Shh. Nat Neurosci 12:1248–1256
25. Ferretti P, Zhang F, Santos-Ruiz L, Clarke JD (2001) FGF signalling and blastema
growth during amphibian tail regeneration. Int J Dev Biol 45:S127–S128
26. Walder S, Zhang F, Ferretti P (2003) Up-regulation of neural stem cell
markers suggests the occurrence of dedifferentiation in regenerating
spinal cord. Dev Genes Evol 213:625–630
27. Grotmol S, Nordvik K, Kryvi H, Totland GK (2005) A segmental pattern of
alkaline phosphatase activity within the notochord coincides with the
initial formation of the vertebral bodies. J Anat 206:427–436
28. Agathocleous M, Iordanova I, Willardsen MI, Xue XY, Vetter ML, Harris WA,
Moore KB (2009) A directional Wnt/beta-catenin-Sox2-proneural pathway
regulates the transition from proliferation to differentiation in the
Xenopus retina. Development 136:3289–3299
29. Sims RT (1962) Transection of the spinal cord in developing Xenopus
laevis. J Embryol Exp Morphol 10:115–126
30. Taniguchi Y, Sugiura T, Tazaki A, Watanabe K, Mochii M (2008) Spinal cord is
required for proper regeneration of the tail in Xenopus tadpoles. Dev
Growth Differ 50:109–120
31. Polezhaev LV (1972) Loss and Restoration of Regenerative Capacity in Tissue
and Organs of Animals. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 75–79
32. Holtzer SW (1956) The inductive activity of the spinal cord in urodele tail
regeneration. J Morphology 99:1–39
33. Poss KD (2010) Advances in understanding tissue regenerative capacity
and mechanisms in animals. Nat Rev Genet 11:710–722
34. Mondia JP, Levin M, Omenetto FG, Orendorff RD, Branch MR, Adams DS
(2011) Long-distance signals are required for morphogenesis of the
regenerating Xenopus tadpole tail, as shown by femtosecond-laser
ablation. PLoS One 6:e24953
35. Drummond-Barbosa D (2008) Stem cells, their niches and the systemic
environment: an aging network. Genetics 180:1787–1797
36. Yoshino J, Tochinai S (2004) Successful reconstitution of the
non-regenerating adult telencephalon by cell transplantation in
Xenopus laevis. Dev Growth Differ 46:523–534
37. Reimer MM, Sorensen I, Kuscha V, Frank RE, Liu C, Becker CG, Becker T28:8510–8516
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
Gaete et al. Neural Development 2012, 7:13 Page 17 of 17
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/7/1/1338. Sirbulescu RF, Ilies I, Zupanc GK (2009) Structural and functional
regeneration after spinal cord injury in the weakly electric teleost fish,
Apteronotus leptorhynchus. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural
Behav Physiol 195:699–714
39. Zupanc GK, Wellbrock UM, Sirbulescu RF, Rajendran RS (2009) Generation,
long-term persistence, and neuronal differentiation of cells with nuclear
aberrations in the adult zebrafish brain. Neuroscience 159:1338–1348
40. Dervan AG, Roberts BL (2003) Reaction of spinal cord central canal cells to
cord transection and their contribution to cord regeneration. J Comp
Neurol 458:293–306
41. Zhang F, Ferretti P, Clarke JD (2003) Recruitment of postmitotic neurons
into the regenerating spinal cord of urodeles. Dev Dyn 226:341–348
42. Berg DA, Kirkham M, Beljajeva A, Knapp D, Habermann B, Ryge J, Tanaka EM,
Simon A (2010) Efficient regeneration by activation of neurogenesis in
homeostatically quiescent regions of the adult vertebrate brain.
Development 137:4127–4134
43. Guo Y, Ma L, Cristofanilli M, Hart RP, Hao A, Schachner M (2011)
Transcription factor Sox11b is involved in spinal cord regeneration in
adult zebrafish. Neuroscience 172:329–341
44. Schlosser G, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Kintner C (2002) Thyroid hormone
promotes neurogenesis in the Xenopus spinal cord. Dev Dyn 225:485–498
45. Egar M, Singer M (1972) The role of ependyma in spinal cord
regeneration in the urodele, Triturus. Exp Neurol 37:422–430
46. Nordlander RH, Singer M (1978) The role of ependyma in regeneration of
the spinal cord in the urodele amphibian tail. J Comp Neurol 180:349–374
47. McDonald D, Cheng C, Chen Y, Zochodne D (2006) Early events of
peripheral nerve regeneration. Neuron Glia Biol 2:139–147
48. Le N, Nagarajan R, Wang JY, Araki T, Schmidt RE, Milbrandt J (2005) Analysis
of congenital hypomyelinating Egr2Lo/Lo nerves identifies Sox2 as an
inhibitor of Schwann cell differentiation and myelination. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 102:2596–2601
49. Parrinello S, Napoli I, Ribeiro S, Digby PW, Fedorova M, Parkinson DB,
Doddrell RD, Nakayama M, Adams RH, Lloyd AC (2010) EphB signaling
directs peripheral nerve regeneration through Sox2-dependent Schwann
cell sorting. Cell 143:145–155
50. Mothe AJ, Kulbatski I, van Bendegem RL, Lee L, Kobayashi E, Keating A, Tator
CH (2005) Analysis of green fluorescent protein expression in transgenic
rats for tracking transplanted neural stem/progenitor cells. J Histochem
Cytochem 53:1215–1226
51. Horky LL, Galimi F, Gage FH, Horner PJ (2006) Fate of endogenous stem/
progenitor cells following spinal cord injury. J Comp Neurol 498:525–538
52. Ke Y, Chi L, Xu R, Luo C, Gozal D, Liu R (2006) Early response of
endogenous adult neural progenitor cells to acute spinal cord injury in
mice. Stem Cells 24:1011–1019
53. Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M, Evergren E, Tomilin N, Shupliakov O,
Frisen J (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6:e182
54. Shihabuddin LS, Horner PJ, Ray J, Gage FH (2000) Adult spinal cord stem
cells generate neurons after transplantation in the adult dentate gyrus.
J Neurosci 20:8727–8735
55. Sive HL, Grainger RM, Harland RM (2000) Early Development of Xenopus
laevis: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laborarory Press, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY, USA
56. Beck CW, Christen B, Slack JM (2003) Molecular pathways needed for
regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev Cell
5:429–439
57. Contreras EG, Gaete M, Sanchez N, Carrasco H, Larrain J (2009) Early
requirement of Hyaluronan for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles.
Development 136:2987–2996
58. Moreno M, Munoz R, Aroca F, Labarca M, Brandan E, Larrain J (2005)
Biglycan is a new extracellular component of the Chordin-BMP4
signaling pathway. EMBO J 24:1397–1405
59. Sugiura T, Taniguchi Y, Tazaki A, Ueno N, Watanabe K, Mochii M (2004)
Differential gene expression between the embryonic tail bud and
regenerating larval tail in Xenopus laevis. Dev Growth Differ 46:97–105
60. Agius E, Oelgeschlager M, Wessely O, Kemp C, De Robertis EM (2000)
Endodermal nodal-related signals and mesoderm induction in Xenopus.
Development 127:1173–1183
61. Pan FC, Chen Y, Loeber J, Henningfeld K, Pieler T (2006) I-SceI
meganuclease-mediated transgenesis in Xenopus. Dev Dyn 235:247–252• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistributiondoi:10.1186/1749-8104-7-13
Cite this article as: Gaete et al.: Spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus
tadpoles proceeds through activation of Sox2-positive cells. Neural
Development 2012 7:13.Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
