6WHP&HOO%DVHG7KHUDSLHV3URPLVHV2EVWDFOHV'LVFRUGDQFH
DQGWKH$JRUD
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, Volume 55, Number 1, Winter
2012, pp. 1-25 (Article)
Published by The Johns Hopkins University Press
DOI: 10.1353/pbm.2012.0001
For additional information about this article
                                Access provided by Auraria Library (UC Denver, Metro State, CCD) (1 Sep 2014 14:55 GMT)
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/pbm/summary/v055/55.1.eggleson.html
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
promises, obstacles, discordance,
and the agora
Center for Nano Science and Technology, University of Notre Dame, 275 Fitzpatrick Hall, Notre
Dame, IN 46556.
E-mail: keggleso@nd.edu.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, volume 55, number 1 (winter 2012):1–25
© 2012 by The Johns Hopkins University Press
ABSTRACT Stem cell research has entered the public consciousness through the
media. Proponents and opponents of all such research, or of human embryonic stem
cell research specifically, engage in heated exchanges in the modern public forum
where stakeholders negotiate, the agora.One common claim that emerges from the fray
is that a particular type of stem cell research should be pursued as the most promising
path toward the reduction of suffering and untimely death for all of humanity. Upon
evaluation, experimental data regarding the potential role of stem cells in regenerative
therapies for three conditions—spinal cord injury, type 1 diabetes, and cardiovascular
disease—tell distinct, complex, and inconclusive stories. Further analyses in this article
incorporate realistic considerations of a broad range of relevant factors: limited funding
for biomedical research, media motives, the discordance hypothesis of evolutionary
medicine, the relationship between religion and science, medical care in developing
nations, and culture wars over abortion. Holistic investigation inspired by the current
agora conversation supports the need to drastically change interactions regarding stem
cell research so that its potential to benefit humanity may be more fully realized.
THE COMMUNICATIVE RELATIONSHIP between science and society has meta-morphosed with the dawn of the 21st century, as articulated by Michael
Gibbons in 1999. In this new social contract,“socially robust” production is ex-
pected—the “reliable” knowledge produced under the previous social contract
no longer suffices. Barriers between sectors have become more permeable than
1
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 1
before, and “the sites at which problems are formulated and negotiated have
moved from their previous institutional locations in government, industry, and
universities into the ‘agora’—the public space in which both ‘science meets the
public’ and the public ‘speaks back’ to science” (pp. C81–C84).With respect to
stem cell research, factions of scientists and citizens alike have displayed more
passion than rationality in the agora.More inflamed than informed, the public is
especially vulnerable to manipulation, and multiple media outlets capitalize on
erupting battles in the culture wars.Also, public statements about the imminent
arrival of cures derived from stem cells have victimized suffering patients and
their loved ones by exaggerating to the point of false—or at least unsubstanti-
ated—hope.This practice diminishes public trust in biomedical science at a time
when trust in science and scientists seems to be on the decline, as exemplified by
persisting public doubts about the validity of climate change science and vaccine
safety (Blakemore 2007; Mooney 2011). Analyses and lamentations of this state
of affairs abound, including the thought that what is truly deficient is media lit-
eracy more than climate literacy. In Caren B. Cooper’s (2011) words: “The data
collected and conclusions reached by scientists do not carry their due weight if
the public is not knowledgeable, engaged, and empowered (not deceived)
through science literacy, public engagement, and media literacy, held together by
the common thread of critical thinking” (pp. 231–37). Critical thinking and the
expression of reasoned analyses are urgently needed concerning topics that the
media has latched onto.Though some scientific research projects have escaped
“medialization,” mass media coverage of stem cell research has met the analyti-
cal criteria for medialization: it is extensive, strongly pluralized, and controversial
(Schafer 2009).
Proponents of embryonic, alternative, and adult stem cell research cite poten-
tial positive outcomes for humanity and the alleviation of suffering as the pri-
mary reasons for their advocacy, though many supporters of adult and alterna-
tive stem cell research are highly motivated to oppose the practice of research
involving human embryo destruction by any legal and effective means.Messages
about imminent potential cures for devastating diseases through the develop-
ment of stem cell–based regenerative therapies resonate powerfully in compas-
sionate listeners. Since stem cell research has been so highly medialized, however,
additional steps are necessary to inform both conscience and reason. In this arti-
cle, I will provide evidence against an assessment of stem cell–based therapies as
standalone “magic bullets” that are nearly ready to fire at the devastation of de-
generative disease. Progress reports in the scientific literature clearly demonstrate
that a more apt metaphor for the current state of affairs in stem cell–based ther-
apy is slow progress though treacherous uncharted territories. Based on this
assessment, I argue against an intensive focus upon stem cell research as the most
expedient means for alleviating suffering and generating positive outcomes for
humanity, and I question the notion that stem cell research will ultimately ben-
efit those in the developing world.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
Kathleen K. Eggleson
2
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 2
3winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
Instead, in consideration of scientific and financial realities, I advocate greater
emphasis on prevention of chronic degenerative diseases attributable in part to
lifestyle factors. Evolutionary medicine illustrates the inherent challenges to life-
style changes that prevent disease, and it also provides a biologically based expla-
nation for why education about healthy choices and harmful effects has not been
effective in reversing the obesity epidemic. Every public dollar spent on research
involving experimental therapies is one not spent on research that more directly
addresses the health needs of the most vulnerable populations, or on treatment
alternatives that may be more cost effective and distributed more justly.Through
my analysis, I mean to convey that a choice to advocate for a particular scientific
pursuit that has entered public consciousness through medialization alone is nei-
ther likely to reflect wise and just stewardship of resources, nor to be in the inter-
ests of good and dignity for humanity as a whole—even when the potential for
some significant benefit to human health seems clear.
Therapeutic Potential of Stem Cells:
Issues from the Outset
Adult stem cell research, including work using induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs), is an alternative to embryonic stem cell research in the quest to manip-
ulate these cells for potential therapeutic use. For some diseases, stem cells may
be used indirectly in the quest for therapies, for understanding disease mecha-
nisms or screening (Thonhoff, Ojeda, andWu 2009).The boldest statements of
therapeutic promise have been based upon the idea that pluripotent stem cells
could be propagated and delivered to the desired physiological site, where they
could alleviate pathology from damage or disease.Without biomedical analysis,
this prospect may seem as plausible and promising as some in the media and in
the field have claimed.
However, most biologists and physicians acknowledge some obvious hurdles
with this approach.The immune system constitutes one of the major obstacles
to the clinical efficacy of stem cell–based therapies. For example, stem cell ther-
apy is mentioned frequently in conjunction with type 1 diabetes, though its
therapeutic potential is severely limited by the fact that additional functioning b
cells would not solve the underlying autoimmune problem. These b cells too
would be subject to attack, rendering the approach a diminishment of effect
rather than cure of cause. (Some strategies to circumvent autoimmunity are
under experimental investigation and will be described briefly later in this
paper.) In the first place, assuming that a human clone is not involved, implan-
tation of human embryonic stem cells or their derivatives into a diseased or dam-
aged body would be allogenic—in other words, non-self into self. Just as in organ
transplantation, the foreign biological matter would be prone to immune rejec-
tion, and immunosuppressive treatment would be required to protect the trans-
planted cells, rendering the host vulnerable to infection. Second, when func-
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 3
tioning normally, immune surveillance detects the inappropriate proliferation of
self-cells and by destroying the offending cells nips most would-be tumors in the
bud. Unfortunately, autologous—self into self—stem cells inserted for therapeu-
tic purpose could suffer the same fate (Dressel et al. 2010).
Furthermore, when self-cells do proliferate out of context or immune con-
trol, a tumor can result.The transplantation of multipotent adult stem cells thus
could give rise to atypical growth in the form of a tumor instead of (or in addi-
tion to) the intended therapeutic function, though even tumor-sensitive immu-
nodeficient mice (severe combined immunodeficiency or SCID) have remained
teratoma-free in some studies (Dimomeletis et al. 2010). Human embryonic
stem cells separated from the controls of native context retain a natural propen-
sity for rapid growth and may also cause teratomas (Tzukerman et al. 2003).
Because of this risk, many current visions of therapeutic promise for pluripotent
stem cells now incorporate an additional step: partial differentiation in an in vitro
context before introduction into a patient or model organism.
Spotlights on Stem Cell–Based Therapy:
Who Shines Them, and Why?
Why and how have stem cell–based research and therapies attracted so much
attention? For defenders of the sanctity of human life from conception to natu-
ral death, the basis for ardent opposition of human embryonic stem cell research
is obvious. Likewise, those who defend abortion rights have found support for
human embryonic stem cell research naturally consistent with their beliefs.Thus,
the subject of stem cell research has become a new battleground in the ongoing
culture wars over abortion, or human life before birth more generally.To date,
this appears to be the primary reason for the disproportionate attention given to
stem cell research and potential medical outcomes relative to other biomedical
research with potential clinical implications.Though often crudely portrayed by
the media, the debate surrounding abortion connects to the sacred and profound
in complex ways that are beyond the scope of this paper.
What might be a less powerful or obvious factor in the intense attention is
that stem cell research is flashy, “sexy” science. Flashy science attracts attention
that is not based on merit or accomplishment, and pertinent experimental results
are often given priority acceptance by high-profile scholarly journals and cover-
age by the mainstream media. An example of this phenomenon occurred in
2006, when the editors of Science retracted two fraudulent stem cell research
papers by Hwang et al. (Kennedy 2006).The scientific community collectively
knows that flashy science is often not the best science in terms of experimental
design, rigor, reproducibility, or implications. A trained bench scientist also
knows that forward progress in research does not come easily, even when no im-
pediments to success can be anticipated at the outset. Even if the major block-
ades can be overcome, more subtle biological circumstances could also render
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
Kathleen K. Eggleson
4
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 4
5winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
therapeutic attempts unsuccessful. For some of the specific conditions being
mentioned in conjunction with potential stem cell–based therapy, such as type 1
diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease, fundamental etiological
mechanisms are not yet adequately understood, and thus the sweeping promises
of healing that have excited politicians and the press are at this time both
unfounded and inappropriate. From the perspective of a biological scientist, the
possibility that interventions derived from pluripotent stem cells may be futile
(particularly in the context of autoimmunity, as in type 1 diabetes) or amount to
playing with fire (in the form of tumors and other potential adverse effects)
means that circumventing obstacles to therapeutic success should be explored
thoroughly and concomitantly with potential positive effects—despite the fact
that such studies are decidedly less flashy.
Yet the justification for increased hope in the future of regenerative medicine
is now in place. Detailed knowledge about natural regenerative processes could
be combined with therapeutic interventions to stimulate them and selectively
dismantle native blockades to the process. The increasing availability of novel
biocompatible materials accelerated by the nanotechnology revolution also sup-
ports an optimistic outlook for engineering regeneration, including protection
from immune attack, in the human body.
“For All Humanity”: Really?
Which human bodies will benefit from stem cell–based therapies? As with other
major issues where biology and justice intersect—such as climate change, sus-
tainability, invasive species, and infectious diseases—broad and critical evaluation
of stem cell–based regenerative therapies appropriately includes the context of
globalized society. Statements about outcomes of stem cell research benefitting
human welfare in total or each person are common, as in “The scientific objec-
tive should be to maximize the potential therapeutic benefits of embryonic stem
cell research for all humanity” (BNAC 2004).
Such sweeping and all-inclusive language about the benefits of stem cell re-
search for humanity provokes skepticism about a point of great significance. Stem
cells may be employed to counter some injuries and chronic degenerative dis-
eases that cause a high proportion of morbidity and mortality in the developed
world. However, if current trends continue, novel regenerative therapies gener-
ally do not stand to benefit our billions of global neighbors in middle- and low-
income nations.This is not to say that poorer nations do not experience mor-
bidity and mortality from injuries or chronic degenerative diseases. Although
proportionally less common as a cause of death, each individual case of chronic
disabling disease arguably causes more suffering in the developing world, due to
the direct effects of the quality and quantity of health care available to the pa-
tient, as well as indirect effects upon other family members, including lost in-
come and sacrificed education (Adeyi, Smith, and Robles 2007). In considering
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 5
the potential for regenerative medicine to improve the health of people in devel-
oping countries, an international panel of experts has recommended that the re-
search and development budgets of industrialized nations fund a grand challenges
initiative on non-communicable diseases, and that governments and biotechnol-
ogy sectors in developing countries collaborate effectively with one another and
with industrialized nations (Greenwood et al. 2006).This set of recommendations
is a tall order indeed, one that acknowledges that all of humanity will not bene-
fit automatically from the achievement of scientific objectives, as some promot-
ing stem cell research have implied. However, although an abundance of thera-
pies of proven efficacy exist, patients in the developing world do not reap much
benefit from them relative to their counterparts in affluent nations now.There is
no basis for the confident assertion belief that the development of novel treat-
ments would fundamentally change this state of affairs in the future.
Further, the targets of some research on stem cell–based therapies are so-
called “diseases of affluence,” those in which lifestyle aspects and choices preva-
lent in high-income nations are known risk factors.These diseases, such as type
2 diabetes and coronary heart disease, affect enormous numbers of those with
lifestyle factors common in affluent nations. Diet and exercise, together with
environmental and genetic factors, contribute heavily to the incidence and pro-
gression of these diseases.Yet despite the prevalence of exacerbating lifestyle fac-
tors, chronic degenerative disease patients in affluent nations fare better than
their counterparts in poorer ones—access to health care more than compensates
for detriment caused by lifestyle factors (Adeyi, Smith, and Robles 2007). In
cases like these, the relative consequences of individual choice and societal con-
text are most clearly revealed when globalized society is examined through the
lens of biological science.
Stem Cell–Based Regenerative Therapy
for Three Disease States
I will now turn the lens of biological science upon the potential use of stem
cell–based therapies for three of the most commonly cited examples, since they
fall into broad categories that allow extrapolation to other cases: regeneration to
repair injury to the spinal cord, type 1 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. I mean
to convey some broad themes: the biological complexity of each disease state,
including the underlying cause(s); what is still unknown or not understood
about the disease state; a therapeutic landscape where stem cell–based therapies
are but one of many options; the risks inherent to cell-based therapy for each
disease state; and critical evaluation of cell-based therapies with multifaceted eth-
ical, medical, and financial criteria. My overarching aim for these sections is to
make clear that the prospects of stem cell–based regenerative therapies are so dis-
tinct from one another with regard to basic science, medicine, sociology, and
ethics that appropriate evaluations must distinguish between specific applications
6
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 6
and acknowledge the holistic complexity involved. Along the way, I strive to
provide substrates for reason-based analysis of the therapeutic promise of stem
cell-based regenerative therapies.
Spinal Cord Injury
The spinal cord is vulnerable to catastrophic injury that can cause loss of sen-
sory and motor functions, including permanent loss of limb movement, somato-
sensation, and function of bladder, bowels, and reproductive organs. Each year,
more than 130,000 spinal cord injuries are estimated to occur in the global
human population, and although some spontaneous recovery of function occurs,
it is rarely complete for serious injuries (Fawcett et al. 2007). Although robotic
prostheses and altering neuronal connectivity are also therapeutic opportunities
that could potentially involve stem cells, the limited scope of this article allows
me to touch only briefly upon the goals of axon regeneration, remyelination, and
increasing the population of functional cells (which could occur through death
minimization, stimulation of neurogenesis, or transplantation;Thomas and Moon
2011).
The central (brain and spinal cord) and peripheral (central nervous system out
to various regions of the body) nervous systems have different populations of
myelin-forming cells, resulting in neuronal fibers that can propagate action
potentials rapidly through saltatory conduction on axons at nodes between areas
insulated by myelin. In addition to this myelin-forming function, Schwann cells
of the peripheral nervous system can actively facilitate the regeneration of a sev-
ered axon, whereas the oligodendrocytes of the central nervous system cannot,
although mature oligodendrocytes do re-extend processes that intercalate be-
tween axons without ensheathing them (Keirstead and Blakemore 1997).
Marked loss of neurons and myelinating cells occurs not just with the injury
event and aftermath, but also progressively over time (Crowe et al. 1997).Natural
molecular barriers to axonal regeneration in the central nervous system exist in
myelin (NOGO, myelin-associated glycoprotein, and oligodendrocyte myelin
glycoprotein), and more are added through the scar that results from the cellular
response to the injury, such as chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (Fitch and Silver
2008; Kwon, Sekhon, and Fehlings 2010; Rowland et al. 2008; Silver and Miller
2004). Further, axon demyelination can occur at the periphery of the cystic cav-
ity formed at the site of injury (Guest, Hiester, and Bunge 2005; Hill, Beattie,
and Bresnahan 2001; Kakulas 1999). Clearly, obstacles to regeneration at the site
of a spinal cord injury on the cellular and molecular levels combine to form a
complex and multifaceted scene of devastation, one that will be difficult to over-
come by a single intervention, including transplantation of stem cells (Kwon,
Sekhon, and Fehlings 2010;Thuret, Moon, and Gage 2006).
Stem cells and spinal cord regeneration. As with other stem cell therapy situations,
there are threats to positive outcomes with every approach. Injected cells could
migrate to unintended sites or cause pain.Along with motor recovery, hypersen-
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 7
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 7
sitivity has been documented with adult neural stem cells in a rat model of spinal
cord injury (Hofstetter et al. 2005).The inherent risks of immunosuppression and
tumor formation accompany transplantation of allogenic cells. Indeed, transplan-
tation of neural stem cells of human embryonic origin directly resulted in brain
tumor formation in one diseased patient (Amariglio et al. 2009).With iPSCs of
neural origin, increased tumor formation after transplantation into brain or spinal
cord has been observed in some cases, and epigenetic memory from the mature
parent cell is also a concern (Kim et al. 2010;Miura et al. 2009;Tsuji et al. 2010).
Establishing a bank of allogenic stem cell lines has also been proposed, though
monitoring of changes in genotype and phenotype over time and many rounds
of division is a major concern (Thomas and Moon 2011).To summarize results
to date, rodent and primate animal models of spinal cord injury have shown
moderate functional recovery when stem cells, both allogenic and autologous, are
transplanted one to two weeks after injury, but this effect is greatly diminished
or eliminated altogether months later (Thomas and Moon 2011;Thuret, Moon,
and Gage 2006).
However, there are major caveats. In general, many animal research studies are
not designed and conducted according to the highest scientific standards.A 2009
literature survey of animal research revealed that 86% of papers did not report
blinding, and 87% did not report randomization when allocating treatments
(Kilkenny et al. 2009). Some of the most promising results involving therapies
for spinal cord injury that are not stem cell based could not be replicated upon
reassessment (Pinzon et al. 2008; Sharp et al. 2010; Steward et al. 2006, 2008).
With spinal cord injury, recovery due to early therapeutic intervention cannot
be clearly distinguished from spontaneous recovery. Further, a direct role for
transplanted cells has been called into question due to their low survival rate and
the facts that some gain of function has been observed with many cell types, and
that even killed cells can be reparative (Arboleda et al. 2011;Thomas and Moon
2011). Indeed, in most cases direct causal links between the transplanted cells,
changes in morphology, and recovery of function have not been established em-
pirically (Thomas and Moon 2011; Thuret, Moon, and Gage 2006). Also, the
roles of endogenous factors, timing, and cellular dynamics of the wound envi-
ronment are not well understood (Almad, Sahinkaya, and McTigue 2011).
Without more clarity about the biological factors and mechanisms that con-
tribute to recovery, it is difficult to imagine a safe and consistently effective ther-
apy for spinal cord injury within the next decade. Nonetheless, in pursuit of the
first-to-market advantage (Thomas and Moon 2011), Geron (2011) began a
Phase 1 clinical trial with a human embryonic stem cell-derived treatment in
October 2010. Amidst substantial ethical and scientific controversy, treatments
have been administered to two subjects with no results reported to date (Regal-
do 2011). Even strong proponents of stem cell research warn patients that most
stem cell–based therapies, including those for spinal cord injury, are experimen-
8
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 8
tal and are not known to be safe, superior to existing therapies, or effective at all
(ISSCR 2008).
Despite this fact, some desperate patients and their caregivers take enormous
risks with black-market embryonic stem cell therapies administered in fly-by-
night clinics (Regaldo 2011). Faced with the sudden crisis of a spinal cord injury
today, the injured person or caretaker may agonize while weighing options: the
possibility of regeneration or detriment through experimental stem cell–based
therapy; a wait-and-see approach with hope for natural restoration; a previous
standard of care now called into question by some medical experts (as in the case
of methylprednisolone); and a variety of other new/experimental therapies that
act by blocking inhibitors of regeneration, preventing cell death, reducing neu-
roinflammation, and other mechanisms (Kwon, Sekhon, and Fehlings 2010). Ex-
tensive research and results collected over many years stand between the meager
and shaky offerings of today and the proven, highly effective therapy options, fer-
vently sought now, that will offer hope for treatment of spinal cord injuries in
the future.
Type 1 Diabetes: Genetic Autoimmune Condition
Type 1 diabetes mellitus, also known as juvenile or insulin-dependent dia-
betes, is an autoimmune disorder that affects >1% of the population worldwide.
The cause of the autoimmunity underlying type 1 diabetes is still unclear,
though multiple genetic loci and environmental factors have been implicated
(Hirschhorn 2003; Krishna, Rao, and Rao 2007).With type 1 diabetes, b cells
from the islets of the pancreas that secrete insulin in a glycemic responsive man-
ner are targeted forT cell–mediated immune attack. Since b cells give rise to ad-
ditional b cells, the primary means for replenishing the insulin-producing b cell
population is also destroyed.The consequent insulin depletion results in hyper-
glycemia and decreased cellular uptake of glucose. Insulin depletion can also per-
turb fatty acid metabolism, leading to an overproduction of ketones that is fatal
if not treated. Several multiorgan morbidities may occur in type 1 diabetes by
early adulthood, including blindness, peripheral vascular disease, neuropathy
leading to amputations, renal failure requiring dialysis, and cardiovascular events
(myocardial infarction, stroke).
The life expectancy of type 1 diabetics is reduced, and current treatment
options leave much to be desired. Insulin injections are necessary for the survival
of a type 1 diabetic, but monitoring and injections are not equivalent to the
exquisite sensitivity of glycemia-stimulated insulin secretion by b cells (Wagner
et al. 2010). Although transplantation of pancreatic or purified insulin-produc-
ing islets can result in reduced insulin dependence and increased glucose stabil-
ity, a lack of suitable donor tissues and the potential for adverse long-term effects
such as graft rejection or nephrotoxicity (kidney damage) caused by immuno-
suppressive agents prevent widespread therapeutic use (Bromberg et al. 2007;
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 9
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 9
Campbell et al. 2007; Shapiro et al. 2006;Vardanyan et al. 2010). Some evidence
suggests that continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion via insulin pump offers
lifestyle and clinical advantages compared with multiple daily insulin injections,
but psychosocial issues such as pump visibility and physical restrictions are sig-
nificant disadvantages to wearing a device 24 hours per day, particularly for
young patients (Alsaleh, Smith, and Taylor 2011). Stem cell–based approaches
have entered the scene and offered some hope for providing patients with type
1 diabetes with an endogenous source of insulin.
b cells wanted: Could stem cells meet the need? The promise of stem cells to in-
crease b cell mass in patients with type 1 diabetes has been explored on multi-
ple fronts. In addition to pluripotent embryonic or iPSCs, facultative stem/pro-
genitor cells from the spleen, liver, bone marrow, endometrium, and pancreas
(endocrine a and preexisting b cells, as well as exocrine acinar and duct cells)
have been investigated as potential wells to be tapped for b cell regeneration (Li
et al. 2010; Wen, Chen, and Ildstad 2011). Following proteomic analysis of
splenic stem cells for markers of multipotency, Faustman and Davis (2010) ex-
plain a key concept in this quest:
In a series of experiments, we asked which expressed proteins are associated
(with) splenic stem cells’ multi-lineage capacity.The second order question was
“how early” are the proteins expressed along the commitment trail? Cells that
are too early along the lineage trail may be too unstable and thus pose a risk of
carcinogenesis, whereas cells that are too far along in the commitment process
might be safe but do not have enough versatility to be stem cells beyond one
or two tissues. (pp. 1578)
Investigations to empirically determine whether transplantation of stem cells
from the spleen, liver, or bone marrow have therapeutic potential for type 1 dia-
betes, and their mechanisms of action, are ongoing.Trans-differentiation of vari-
ous types of liver cells into pancreatic lineages through viral delivery of pancreatic
transcription factors have been demonstrated, including therapeutic proof-of-con-
cept studies byYechhoor et al. (Aviv et al. 2009; Manohar and Lagasse 2009; Na-
gaya et al. 2009;Yechoor et al. 2009a, 2009b; Zalzman, Anker-Kitai, and Efrat
2005). Stem cells from the spleen have been shown to reverse diabetes in a mouse
model when autoimmunity was kept at bay (Kodama et al. 2003).Whether CD45-
splenic stem cells positive for Hox11, an embryonic transcription factor, are capa-
ble of generating b cells or not remains controversial (Chong et al. 2006;Dieguez-
Acuna et al. 2010;Faustman and Davis 2010;Lonyai et al. 2008;Nishio et al. 2006).
Low oncogenic potential for splenic stem cells, much later on the commit-
ment trail than embryonic stem cells or iPSCs, has been touted as a major poten-
tial benefit of their therapeutic use (Dieguez-Acuna et al. 2010; Faustman and
Davis 2010).A number of strategies to circumvent the tumor risk associated with
embryonic and iPSCs approaches have been proposed. Employment of available
cell sorting technologies to ensure that cells differentiated in vitro prior to ther-
10
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 10
apeutic use are not contaminated with still-pluripotent cells that can give rise to
teratomas is being widely discussed as one possible solution, though the sorting
process may be detrimental to the quantity or quality of cells injected (Maehr
2011;Wagner et al. 2010). Apoptosis-inducing suicide genes can be introduced
to pluripotent cells by viral transduction without loss of function.The integrated
suicide genes then function as switch, flipped upon drug (nontoxic preform) ad-
ministration (Kiuru et al. 2009; Zhong et al. 2011).Thus, suicide genes seem to
be another promising option for safeguarding patients from tumors derived from
pluripotent cells, though there is risk inherent to the genomic integration the
technique requires (Schuldiner, Itskovitz-Eldor, and Benvenisty 2003). Finally,
shrinking established teratomas is possible through the inhibition of a specific
transcription factor, Nanog, by disruption of its regulatory pathway (Moretto-
Zita et al. 2010).
The autoimmune problem and unanswered questions. Increasing the number of
glycemia responsive b cells, like the addition of exogenous insulin, is a treatment
for type 1 diabetes, but it is highly unlikely to be a cure because the transplanted
b cells would also be targeted by the immune system (Azzi et al. 2010). Meta-
phorically, pouring more functional b cells into the system does help alleviate the
drought, but the system cannot be adequately saturated because the drain caused
by the autoimmunity underlying type 1 diabetes is so large and remains open con-
stitutively. The most effective intervention strategy for type 1 diabetes will be a
combination approach that addresses both reestablishing a self-replenishing supply
of cells capable of glycemia-stimulated insulin secretion and protecting these cells
from attack by the immune system, ideally without need for risk-inherent immu-
nosuppression (Krishna, Rao, and Rao 2007;Wainwright et al. 2006).
One approach proposed to address the autoimmune component of type 1 dia-
betes involves modeling and understanding the initiation and progression of the
disease by using patient-specific iPSCs cells in vitro or in humanized rodent sys-
tems (King et al. 2008;Maehr 2011).While this approach could identify novel tar-
gets for treatment or system components for modulation, cloaking strategies have
also been pursued. Encapsulation of stem cells, shielding them from immune
attack while allowing for insulin efflux, has yielded promising results: they have
been shown to be clinically effective (glucose levels, body weight), not tumori-
genic, and isolated from the immune system in a mouse model (Dean et al. 2006;
Ngoc et al. 2011; Shao et al. 2011).Another means for addressing the b cell auto-
immune attack is inherent in specific stem cell types: hematopoietic stem cells and
mutipotent mesenchymal stromal/stem cells. Transplantation of hematopoietic
stem cells, native to the bone marrow, has been used for the treatment of autoim-
mune disease (Couzin-Frankel 2010). Clinical studies involving transient immu-
noablation to “reset” the immune system, followed by reconstitution with autol-
ogous hematopoietic stem cells, have demonstrated some positive results, even
after multiyear follow-up, for patients with type 1 diabetes (Burt et al. 2002;
Couri et al. 2009; Diabetes Research Group 1998; Milanetti et al. 2010 Snarski
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 11
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 11
et al. 2011;Voltarelli et al. 2007).However, there are lingering nontrivial concerns,
such as the common occurrence of adverse effects, efficacy that is restricted to the
new-onset period, and concerns about study design (Couri et al. 2009;
Rosengren et al. 2009; Ross and Philipson 2007;Voltarelli et al. 2007).
Mechanisms of action behind the observed positive results of autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation have yet to be clearly elucidated, but
results suggest the immune tolerance may be achieved through reduced auto-
antibody titers, cytokine effects, and cellular alterations (Voltarelli et al. 2008).
Though not thought to become b cells themselves, hematopoietic stem cells may
promote increased b cell mass through enhanced neovascularization, decreased
apoptosis, or stimulation of proliferation (Hess et al. 2003; Lechner et al. 2004;
Rosengren et al. 2009;Taneera et al. 2006). Multipotent mesenchymal stromal/
stem cells also originate from bone marrow.Their immunomodulatory proper-
ties have been demonstrated, including increasedTreg cells (Berman et al. 2010).
Animal models for type 1 diabetes have demonstrated the therapeutic efficacy of
mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (Jurewicz et al. 2010;Madec et al. 2009;Neshati
et al. 2010), although whether or not these cells give rise to b cells or serve to
enhance or support b cell function in addition to their immunomodulatory
effects remains controversial (Chandra et al. 2009; Fiorina et al. 2009; Kang et al.
2009; Lee et al. 2006; Sordi et al. 2010). Interestingly, it seems that b cells do not
fully mature in vitro, and that in vivo niche factors are essential for the final steps
of the process (Kroon et al. 2008; Naujok et al. 2009;Wagner et al. 2010). In
order for the promise of stem cells in type 1 diabetes treatment to be realized
with maximum benefit and minimization of adverse effects, more detailed and
comprehensive answers to the relevant fundamental questions are needed.What
causes the autoimmune targeting of b cells? What factors are necessary for gly-
cemia-stimulated insulin secretion?Which stem cells can give rise to b cells?
Cardiovascular Disease
In 2007 (the most recent year for released mortality data), cardiovascular dis-
ease accounted for 1 in 2.9 deaths in the United States.The likelihood of death
from heart disease increases dramatically with each passing decade of life. In the
United States, the death rate (per population) increases 2.3 fold between 55- to
64- and 65- to 74-year-olds, another 2.84 fold between 64- to 74- and 75- to
84-year-olds, and an additional 3.25 fold between 75- to 84-year-olds and all of
those 85 and older (NCHS 2011). Over two-thirds of deaths attributed to car-
diovascular disease occurred at 75 years of age or older (Roger et al. 2011). In
considering intervention, it is useful to distinguish whether the goal is to reduce
the instances where cardiovascular disease is the cause of death, as is appropriate
for suicide, accidents, or drowning, or whether the goal is compression of mor-
bidity, or reducing the span of disability preceding a death that is not prema-
ture—a goal of healthy aging (Adeyi, Smith, and Robles 2007). In monetary
12
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 12
terms, cardiovascular disease costs Americans more than any other diagnostic
category, including all cancers and benign neoplasms combined.
Risk factors for cardiovascular disease have been well established, are preva-
lent in the U.S. population, and are not well controlled, despite broad dissemi-
nation of information, clinical advising, and social supports for responsible self-
care. One in five Americans is a cigarette smoker, a proportion that holds even
among students in grades 9 through 12 (Roger et al. 2011). Despite numerous
forms of promotion that encourage a healthy lifestyle by exercising more and
eating less, actual behavior is trending in the opposite direction. Between 1971
and 2004, average total energy consumption by adult American men has in-
creased by 9% in men and by 17% in women (NCHS 2011).Thirty-six percent
of adults admit to engaging in no vigorous activity whatsoever. Children 6 to 11
years of age have exhibited a dramatic change in the prevalence of obesity over
three decades, from approximately 4% to over 20%. In 2008, the proportion of
American adults meeting criteria for overweight and obese is approximately
two-thirds, with half meeting body mass index criteria for obesity. Incidence of
diagnosed diabetes mellitus (with the vast majority of patients type 2, adult
onset) has risen dramatically along with the proportion of overweight and obese
to 8% in 2008, with 37% exhibiting abnormal fasting glucose levels or predia-
betes (Roger et al. 2011). Data from a three-year nationwide survey reveal that
over a third of adults in the United States have hypertension, that one-fifth of
these are not aware of their condition, and that less than half of those aware of
their condition have it under control (CDC 2010).
This bleak picture provides the backdrop for rampant cardiovascular disease,
and although the scene could be radically changed by modification of human
behavior on a population level, many patients experience damage, such as left
ventricular remodeling and dysfunction, that cannot be reversed without direct
medical intervention. Existing treatment options include medications, bypass
surgery, or angioplasty. However, one-year mortality rates for acute myocardial
infarction (heart attack) remain as high as 13%, and approximately 20% for heart
failure (Mathiasen, Haack-Sorensen, and Kastrup 2009; Mozid et al. 2011). For
this reason, the quest to improve outcomes with new intervention strategies is
the subject of active research. Regenerative stem cell therapy is one of the treat-
ment options currently under investigation for myocardial infarction and heart
disease.
Cardiac regeneration via stem cell therapy. Although the human heart contains
progenitor cells capable of self-renewal, the intrinsic repair mechanism is insuf-
ficient to restore myocardial contractile function to compensate for the exten-
sive tissue damage associated with a myocardial infarction (Bergmann et al. 2009;
Marban 2007; Nadal-Ginard et al. 2003). In order to contribute to cardiac func-
tion, therapy-derived cardiomyocytes must integrate with native cardiomyocytes
electrically and mechanically (Segers and Lee 2008).A number of allogenic and
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 13
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 13
autologous stem cell types have been investigated in animal models of cardio-
vascular disease, as well as in human patients in some cases.
Although other cell types have shown promising results, heart failure and left
ventricular damage due to myocardial infarction have been investigated in two
main cell types: skeletal myoblasts and bone marrow–derived stem cells (Christo-
forou et al. 2010;Mozid et al. 2011). Engraftment of skeletal myoblasts improved
cardiac function in animal models of myocardial infarction, but early clinical tri-
als revealed elevated levels of ventricular tachyarrythmia, and the study was
halted prematurely.This disappointing result has been attributed to the lack of
connexin-43 expression in skeletal myoblasts post-transplantation, causing a fail-
ure of electrical integration with host myocardium.Transplantation of bone mar-
row–derived stem and progenitor cells has also resulted in improved cardiac
function. Although administered cells integrate into myocardium, genetic data
suggest that the mechanism of therapeutic action is derived from their paracrine
effects, rather than proliferation and function of the cells themselves (Balsam et
al. 2004; Murry et al. 2004; Nygren et al. 2004).These paracrine effects include
neovascularization, restoration of extracellular matrix, recruitment of endoge-
nous stem cells, and anti-apoptotic effects. Low retention of stem cells in the in-
farcted area, failure of transplanted cells to survive long-term, and functional
substitution of cell-free bone marrow extracts for intact cells support the find-
ing that cardiac regeneration via stem cell therapy is accomplished indirectly
through paracrine effects rather than the transplanted cells (Lee et al. 2011;Mul-
ler-Ehmsen et al. 2006; van der Bogt et al. 2008;Yeghiazarians et al. 2009).A sub-
population of stem cells derived from bone marrow,mesenchymal stem cells, are
notable in that they appear to possess immunoprivilege, which could allow for
allogenic transplantation (Pittenger and Martin 2004). Bone marrow–derived
stem cells are also pragmatically favorable for autologous use, since procedures
for harvest and ex vivo expansion are well established. Investigations of the
potential therapeutic use of bone marrow–derived stem or progenitor cells have
advanced to clinical trials.
Other heart health strategies. Cutting-edge treatment options extend beyond
exogenous stem cells alone. Resident cardiac stem cells combined with growth
factors improve cardiac function (Urbanek et al. 2005).The ultimate approach to
cardiac tissue regeneration may be a carefully orchestrated combination of car-
diac stem cells, transplanted stem cells, growth factors, and biomaterials (Madon-
na and De Caterina 2011).Although many years stand between the present and
a future time when such a complex approach has been refined and tested for
general medical use, experts in the field are intent on developing an effective
strategy:“Given our increasing ability to control the fates of cells and tissues, the
debate over whether the heart is intrinsically terminally differentiated seems
anachronistic, for the heart does not exist apart from the person who knows how
to manipulate it. It is more useful to ask what we can do to promote cardiac re-
generation best, and then do it” (Laflamme and Murry 2011, p. 334).
14
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 14
Fortunately, the means for controlling many cases of myocardial infarction and
heart disease are already in our hands. Established and readily available strategies,
such as beta blockers and aspirin, should be used more consistently and effectively
(Braunwald 1997). For example, aspirin was administered in less than half of
myocardial infarction cases in multiple studies (Mathews et al. 2010; Saketkhou
et al. 1997).We also know of another safe, inexpensive, and extremely effective
approach: prevention through healthy eating and regular exercise. In the Surgeon
General’s National Prevention Strategy, released June 16, 2011, healthy eating and
active living are two of the seven priorities articulated (National Prevention
Council 2011). The document highlights food insecurity and the fact that 23
million Americans live in “food deserts” peppered with fast food restaurants and
convenience stores but without access to the healthy offerings of a supermarket.
The first goal articulated in the healthy eating section of the strategy document
is to “increase access to healthy and affordable foods in communities” (p. 34).The
active living section points out factors of the modern lifestyle such as “screen
time,” as well as the obstacles faced by ethnic minorities who disproportionately
inhabit communities perceived as too unsafe for outdoor exercise.Yet these soci-
ological realities are not the only factors that explain our difficulty in disease
prevention through diet and exercise.To identify and make sense of some of the
biological factors, it is helpful to consider them in the light of evolution. As
Theodosius Dobzhansky (1964) succinctly put it: “nothing makes sense in biol-
ogy except in the light of evolution, sub specie evolutionis” (pp. 449).
The discordance hypothesis and cardiac tissue damage. Human history has outpaced
human evolution. Although we possess many evolution-refined biological traits
that contribute to human flourishing in a modern cosmopolitan lifestyle, some
long-standing and once-beneficial traits are destructive out of context. In the
field of evolutionary medicine, this phenomenon of mismatch between genome
and lifestyle is called the “discordance hypothesis” (Eaton, Cordain, and Linde-
berg 2002; Eaton et al. 2002).When food was scarce, energy was expended in
obtaining it.This inherent exercise and lack of opportunity for overeating means
that self-control was not needed to prevent obesity. In fact, craving and tendency
to consume abundant quantities of sweet or fatty foods would confer a survival,
and thus selective, advantage (Nesse and Williams 1998). Additionally, the
propensity to become sedentary upon opportunity would shield an individual
from predation and conserve energy for food acquisition and reproduction,
which would also confer a selective advantage.
These inborn tendencies to avoid unnecessary exercise and eat fatty and sweet
foods in combination with the attributes of a cosmopolitan lifestyle—sedentary-
but-stressful work, plentiful food that maximizes shelf life and consumer appeal
over nutritional value, little time allotted for food preparation, and reliance upon
transportation—add up to explain today’s rampant obesity and related disease
states in the United States and other developed nations. Interestingly, chronic
degenerative diseases, including heart disease and type 2 diabetes related to obe-
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 15
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 15
sity, are only rarely observed in modern foragers, even at advanced ages (Eaton
et al. 2002). Prevention of obesity-related chronic degenerative diseases in a
modern environment requires deliberate effort against nature’s current, as it has
been established by biological evolution. Specific genes, interpersonal interac-
tions, life events, and microenvironments can render this effort even more chal-
lenging for some individuals, and obesity frequently becomes a lifelong problem
(Knowles 2009).
Biomedical Research and Stewardship
of Limited Resources
Though covering the demographic data is beyond the scope of this article, it is
important to acknowledge that some racial and ethnic minorities suffer from
obesity-related diseases at rates much higher than the general population. Effec-
tive prevention programs must acknowledge the importance of long-standing
cultural traditions and reluctance to change them, out of respect for the tradi-
tions themselves and for social justice reasons. Individuals and societies can be
responsible for understanding the human body, including areas of antagonism
between the products of historical and evolutionary trends, and learn to better
care for it. Supporting a potential “magic bullet” of stem cell–mediated tissue
regeneration at the expense of attention and commitment to maintaining health
and avoiding obesity-related tissue damage in the first place is an error in judg-
ment and strategy.
Are we making that error today? In a recent article in the New England Journal
of Medicine,Yanovski andYonovski (2011) state that:“As increasing recognition of
the public health impact of obesity leads to implementation of programs and
policies, it is also essential that outcomes be evaluated so that we know what
works and what doesn’t and can direct our energies and resources toward strate-
gies that are most likely to be successful” (p. 989).Yes, but what if we cannot col-
lectively afford the strategies (such as surgeries or other intensive treatments) that
are most likely to be successful? Although it is a nation of great wealth, resources
for biomedical research in the United States are quite limited, access to them is
extremely competitive, and many qualified researchers are denied the means
necessary to do promising work. In FY2010, only 22.6% of reviewed National
Institutes of Health (NIH) grant proposals were funded (NIH 2011a,Table 205-
A).There are nearly 7,000 rare diseases, yet we have therapies for fewer than 200
of them (Collins 2011). Thus, every decision about resource allocation for re-
search, even when not directly involving the unborn or epidemic lethality, is life
or death for someone, now and in the future. Evaluating allocation of funds for
basic and biomedical research toward responsible stewardship of limited collec-
tive resources is hardly a simple task, as publicly available estimates of funding
through the Research, Condition, and Disease Categorization (RCDC) system
16
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 16
of the NIH presents figures for categories that are not mutually exclusive and
determined by data mining. Since “the NIH does not expressly budget by cate-
gory” (NIH 2011b), critical evaluation and open debate regarding the relative
distribution of resources based upon data analysis are in effect discouraged.
Whose voices are audible in the conversations that determine resource allo-
cation? Chronic degenerative diseases related to obesity affect many adults, and
therefore many people who vote in a democracy. Elected officials demonstrate
commitment and prioritization primarily by allocation of financial resources,
and this is an effective means of advancing research and social programs that sup-
port the common good.However, at times dollars are shuttled toward a problem
even when resource-intensive methods are not the best means of solving it at
that moment, because this action is the most straightforward and because it ap-
peases and pleases the greatest number of people. Burkitt’s axiom—that reduc-
tion of disease incidence is not accomplished by improving diagnosis and ther-
apy alone—applies to obesity-related disease.The recent release of the Surgeon
General’s National Prevention Strategy is an encouraging move in the direction
of a collective and state-supported emphasis on prevention (National Prevention
Council 2011).
Manifold Discord:
A Hazard to Individual and Public Health
Prevention strategies for reducing disease-related suffering seek to engage and aid
both mind and body. Both the Cartesian dichotomy of mind and body and the
inextricable link between body and soul described by Aristotle may be useful for
analyzing human health through the lens of evolutionary medicine.With regard
to the Cartesian dichotomy, the difficulty is the increasing discordance between
a physiological form shaped by biological human evolution and a mind encoun-
tering an environment shaped by sociocultural evolution.The gap continues to
widen because biological evolution generally advances at a very slow pace, espe-
cially compared to the radical changes in the human habitat instigated primarily
by human behavior.The most recent two or three centuries and the small num-
ber of generations therein are minute compared to the time over which biolog-
ical human evolution has occurred (Eaton et al. 2002).With regard to Aristotle,
the notion that the body and soul are inextricably linked, though distinct, leads
to the conclusion that the proper care and keeping of a human being encom-
passes both (Stauffer 2010). Ideally, this care would occur in harmonious balance,
as simultaneously as possible, throughout the lifespan of each person, rather than
expressing behaviors selected for during biological evolution, accruing physio-
logical damage as a result, and then turning to the products of sociocultural evo-
lution—such as modern medicine, including stem cell–based regenerative thera-
pies—to repair or replace damaged components of the physical form.
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 17
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 17
If self-understanding through an evolutionary lens is one key to the steward-
ship of our bodies and collective public health resources, why isn’t this powerful
argument put forward more broadly? Konner (2001) laments that:“One can only
wonder how many lives might have been saved if Darwin’s Origin of Species had
been incorporated into medical school curricula when it was published in 1859.
Or even, alas, a century later” (p. 361).However, the practice of medicine is most
often focused on the individual patient at one moment in time.Health interven-
tions imposed at the population level, such as water fluoridation, may be met
with suspicion and intense scrutiny (Bryson 2004; Doull 2006). Also, science
illiteracy and media illiteracy among the American public, including some reli-
gious believers who reject evolution on religious grounds, means that attempts
to introduce evolution-based medicine would likely provoke widespread hostil-
ity, and therefore prove self-defeating.These same traits have led to ignorant con-
demnation of all stem cell research.This is an extremely worrisome state of af-
fairs, because irrational and vitriolic conflict between the scientific and religious
communities in the agora will surely continue to damage both, and future gen-
erations will pay the greatest price.
Against Oversimplification and Dichotomy
in the Agora
At present, the agora is dominated by impassioned, irrational, and combative
conversation about stem cell research toward regenerative therapies.As this arti-
cle has illustrated, the realities surrounding stem cell research and its aims are
multidimensional and fraught with complexity. Black-and-white rhetoric sells: it
puts dollars behind research projects and lucrative advertising into media prod-
ucts. Responsible evaluation of options related to stem cell–based regenerative
therapies will entail eschewing black-and-white thinking and confronting com-
plexity, as well as uncertainty, ethical issues, and prioritization.
The three disease states explored in this paper suffice to illustrate profound
biological and sociological differences between potential uses of stem cells for
therapeutic purposes. Clearly, “stem cell research” and “regenerative medicine”
do not describe well-defined endeavors, but represent broad categories encom-
passing significant heterogeneity. By considering biological areas individually, we
can begin to formulate penetrating, real-life questions that extend beyond the
realm of science.Which disease states should be targeted for treatment by regen-
erative medicine? Which patients? At what cost? How are cell-based therapies
evaluated against other alternatives? Is the goal of regenerative medicine best
illustrated by beneficially altering an inherent disease state in young children (as
in type 1 diabetes), by restoring lost physiological function to young adults
healthy enough for high-risk physical activity (as in spinal cord injury), or by re-
pairing or replacing damaged or worn out parts in older adults (as in cardiovas-
cular disease)? All of these?Why?
18
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 18
Apart from the common stem cell means, the aims in these cases are quite dis-
tinct, and they merit rational evaluation that acknowledges differences as well as
commonalities and respects different human stakeholders more than the broad
aims of cause advancement and political positioning. If the primary aim of those
engaged in the stem cell debate is to prevail in a new battleground in the ongo-
ing right-to-life versus abortion-rights war, then one side or another may have
something to celebrate. However, if there is truth to the claim that the primary
aim of stem cell research advocacy is positive outcomes for humanity and the
alleviation of suffering, then the current conversation in the agora is itself an im-
pediment to the pursuit of this noble goal and a collective failure to apply the
best of our capabilities when human lives are at stake.
References
Adeyi, O., O. Smith, and S. Robles. 2007. Public policy and the challenge of chronic noncom-
municable diseases.Washington,DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment/World Bank.
Almad,A., F. R. Sahinkaya, and D. M. McTigue. 2011. Oligodendrocyte fate after spinal
cord injury.Neurotherapeutics 8(2):262–73.
Alsaleh, F. M., F. J. Smith, and K. M.Taylor. 2011. Experiences of children/young people
and their parents, using insulin pump therapy for the management of type 1 diabetes:
Qualitative review. J Clin PharmTher. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01283.x.
Amariglio, N., et al. 2009. Donor-derived brain tumor following neural stem cell trans-
plantation in an ataxia telangiectasia patient. PLoS Medicine 6(2): e1000029.
Arboleda, D., et al. 2011. Transplantation of predifferentiated adipose-derived stromal
cells for the treatment of spinal cord injury.Cell Mol Neurobiol 31(7):1113–22.
Aviv,V., et al. 2009. Exendin-4 promotes liver cell proliferation and enhances the PDX-
1-induced liver to pancreas transdifferentiation process. J Biol Chem 284(48): 33509–
20.
Azzi, J., et al. 2010. Immunological aspects of pancreatic islet cell transplantation. Expert
Rev Clin Immunol 6(1):111–24.
Balsam, L. B., et al. 2004. Haematopoietic stem cells adopt mature haematopoietic fates
in ischaemic myocardium.Nature 428(6983):668–73.
Bergmann, O., et al. 2009. Evidence for cardiomyocyte renewal in humans. Science 324
(5923):98–102.
Berman, D.M., et al. 2010.Mesenchymal stem cells enhance allogeneic islet engraftment
in nonhuman primates.Diabetes 59(10):2558–68.
Blakemore, C. 2007. From the “public understanding of science” to scientists’ understanding of
the public:The Dana Foundation series on neuroethics.Washington, DC: Dana Press.
Braunwald, E. 1997. Shattuck lecture. Cardiovascular medicine at the turn of the millen-
nium: Triumphs, concerns, and opportunities.N Engl J Med 337(19):1360–69.
British-North American Committee (BNAC). 2004.A guide to the benefits, responsibilities,
and opportunities of embryonic stem cell research.Vol. BN-47. http://www.acus.org/docs/
0406-Guide_Benefits_Responsibilities_Opportunities_Embryonic_Stem_Cell_
Research.pdf.
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 19
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 19
Bromberg, J. S., et al. 2007.The islet transplant experiment:Time for a reassessment.Am
JTransplant 7(10):2217–18.
Bryson, C. 2004. The fluoride deception. NewYork: Seven Stories Press.
Burt, R. K., et al. 2002. Hematopoietic stem cell therapy for type 1 diabetes: Induction
of tolerance and islet cell neogenesis. Autoimmun Rev 1(3):133–38.
Campbell, P. M., et al. 2007. High risk of sensitization after failed islet transplantation.
Am JTransplant 7(10):2311–17.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health Statis-
tics (NCHS). 2010. National health and nutrition examination survey data. Hyattsville,
MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.
Chandra, V., et al. 2009. Generation of pancreatic hormone-expressing islet-like cell
aggregates from murine adipose tissue-derived stem cells. Stem Cells 27(8):1941–53.
Chong,A. S., et al. 2006. Reversal of diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice without spleen
cell-derived beta cell regeneration. Science 311(5768):1774–75.
Christoforou, N., et al. 2010. Implantation of mouse embryonic stem cell-derived car-
diac progenitor cells preserves function of infarcted murine hearts. PLoS One 5(7):
e11536.
Cooper, C. B. 2011.Media literacy as a key strategy toward improving public acceptance
of climate change science. Bioscience 61(3):231–37.
Couri, C. E., et al. 2009.C-peptide levels and insulin independence following autologous
nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in newly diagnosed type 1
diabetes mellitus. JAMA 301(15):1573–79.
Couzin-Frankel, J. 2010. Immunology: Replacing an immune system gone haywire. Sci-
ence 327(5967):772–74.
Crowe, M. J., et al. 1997.Apoptosis and delayed degeneration after spinal cord injury in
rats and monkeys.Nat Med 3(1):73–76.
Dean, S. K., et al. 2006. Differentiation of encapsulated embryonic stem cells after trans-
plantation. Transplantation 82(9):1175–84.
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. 1998. Effect of intensive
therapy on residual beta-cell function in patients with type 1 diabetes in the diabetes
control and complications trial:A randomized, controlled trial.Ann Intern Med 128(7):
517–23.
Dieguez-Acuna, F., et al. 2010. Proteomics identifies multipotent and low oncogenic risk
stem cells of the spleen. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42(10):1651–60.
Dimomeletis, I., et al. 2010. Assessment of human MAPCs for stem cell transplantation
and cardiac regeneration after myocardial infarction in SCID mice. Exp Hematol
38(11):1105–14.
Dobzhansky,T. 1964. Biology, molecular and organismic. Am Zoologist 4:443–52.
Doull, J. et al. 2006.Fluoride in drinking water:A scientific review of EPA’s standards.Washing-
ton, DC: National Academies Press.
Dressel, R., et al. 2010. Pluripotent stem cells are highly susceptible targets for syngeneic,
allogeneic, and xenogeneic natural killer cells. FASEB J 24(7):2164–77.
Eaton, S. B., L. Cordain, and S. Lindeberg. 2002. Evolutionary health promotion:A con-
sideration of common counterarguments. Prevent Med 34(2):119–23.
Eaton, S. B., et al. 2002. Evolutionary health promotion. Prevent Med 34(2):109–18.
Faustman, D. L., and M. Davis. 2010. Stem cells in the spleen:Therapeutic potential for
20
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 20
sjogren’s syndrome, type I diabetes, and other disorders. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42(10):
1576–79.
Fawcett, J.W., et al. 2007. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord
injury as developed by the ICCP panel: Spontaneous recovery after spinal cord injury
and statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical trials. Spinal Cord 45(3):190–205.
Fiorina, P., et al. 2009. Immunomodulatory function of bone marrow-derived mes-
enchymal stem cells in experimental autoimmune type 1 diabetes. J Immunol 183(2):
993–1004.
Fitch, M.T., and J. Silver. 2008. CNS injury, glial scars, and inflammation: Inhibitory ex-
tracellular matrices and regeneration failure. Exp Neurol 209(2):294–301.
Geron. 2011. http://www.geron.com/GRNOPC1Trial/. [Note: Geron halted the trial
on Nov. 14, 2011.]
Gibbons, M. 1999. Science’s new social contract with society. Nature 402(6761 suppl.):
C81–C84.
Greenwood, H. L., et al. 2006. Regenerative medicine and the developing world. PLoS
Med 3(9):e381.
Guest, J. D., E. D. Hiester, and R. P. Bunge. 2005. Demyelination and schwann cell re-
sponses adjacent to injury epicenter cavities following chronic human spinal cord in-
jury. Exp Neurol 192(2):384–93.
Hess, D., et al. 2003. Bone marrow-derived stem cells initiate pancreatic regeneration.
Nat Biotechnol 21(7):763–70.
Hill, C. E., M. S. Beattie, and J. C. Bresnahan. 2001. Degeneration and sprouting of iden-
tified descending supraspinal axons after contusive spinal cord injury in the rat. Exp
Neurol 171(1):153–69.
Hirschhorn, J.N. 2003.Genetic epidemiology of type 1 diabetes.Pediatr Diabetes 4(2):87–
100.
Hofstetter, C. P., et al. 2005.Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem cell
grafts: Directed differentiation improves outcome.Nat Neurosci 8(3):346–53.
International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR). 2008. Patient handbook on stem cell
therapies. http://www.isscr.org/clinical_trans/pdfs/ISSCRPatientHandbook.pdf.
Jurewicz, M., et al. 2010. Congenic mesenchymal stem cell therapy reverses hypergly-
cemia in experimental type 1 diabetes.Diabetes 59(12):3139–47.
Kakulas, B. A. 1999. A review of the neuropathology of human spinal cord injury with
emphasis on special features. J Spinal Cord Med 22(2):119–24.
Kang, H. M., et al. 2009. Insulin-secreting cells from human eyelid-derived stem cells
alleviate type I diabetes in immunocompetent mice. Stem Cells 27(8):1999–2008.
Keirstead, H. S., and W. F. Blakemore. 1997. Identification of post-mitotic oligodendro-
cytes incapable of remyelination within the demyelinated adult spinal cord. J Neuro-
pathol Exp Neurol 56(11):1191–201.
Kennedy, D. 2006. Editorial retraction. Science 311(5759):335.
Kilkenny, C., et al. 2009. Survey of the quality of experimental design, statistical analysis
and reporting of research using animals. PLoS One 4(11): e7824.
Kim, K., et al. 2010. Epigenetic memory in induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 467
(7313):285–90.
King,M., et al. 2008.Humanized mice for the study of type 1 diabetes and beta cell func-
tion. Ann NY Acad Sci 1150:46–53.
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 21
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 21
Kiuru,M., et al. 2009. Genetic control of wayward pluripotent stem cells and their prog-
eny after transplantation.Cell Stem Cell 4(4):289–300.
Knowles, P. 2009. Obesity is a lifelong health problem. PsycCRITIQUES 54(26). http://
search.proquest.com/docview/621870697?accountid=12874.
Kodama, S., et al. 2003. Islet regeneration during the reversal of autoimmune diabetes in
NOD mice. Science 302(5648):1223–27.
Konner, M. 2001. Evolution and our environment:Will we adapt? West J Med 174(5):
360–61.
Krishna, K.A., G.V. Rao, and K. S. Rao. 2007. Stem cell-based therapy for the treatment
of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Regen Med 2(2):171–77.
Kroon, E., et al. 2008. Pancreatic endoderm derived from human embryonic stem cells
generates glucose-responsive insulin-secreting cells in vivo.Nat Biotechnol 26(4):443–
52.
Kwon, B. K., L. H. Sekhon, and M.G. Fehlings. 2010. Emerging repair, regeneration, and
translational research advances for spinal cord injury. Spine 35(21 suppl.):S263–S270.
Laflamme, M.A., and C. E. Murry. 2011. Heart regeneration.Nature 473(7347):326–35.
Lechner,A., et al. 2004. No evidence for significant transdifferentiation of bone marrow
into pancreatic beta-cells in vivo.Diabetes 53(3):616–23.
Lee, R. H., et al. 2006.Multipotent stromal cells from human marrow home to and pro-
mote repair of pancreatic islets and renal glomeruli in diabetic NOD/scid mice. Proc
Nat Acad Sci USA 103(46):17438–43.
Lee,Y. K., et al. 2011. Current perspective of stem cell therapies for cardiac regeneration.
Therapy 8(1):69.
Li, H.Y., et al. 2010. Induction of insulin-producing cells derived from endometrial mes-
enchymal stem-like cells. J Pharmacol ExpTher 335(3):817–29.
Lonyai,A., et al. 2008.The promise of Hox11 stem cells of the spleen for treating autoim-
mune diseases.Horm Metab Res 40(2):137–46.
Madec,A. M., et al. 2009. Mesenchymal stem cells protect NOD mice from diabetes by
inducing regulatory T cells.Diabetologia 52(7):1391–99.
Madonna, R., and R. De Caterina. 2011. Stem cells and growth factor delivery systems
for cardiovascular disease. J Biotechnol 154(4):291–97.
Maehr, R. 2011. iPS cells in type 1 diabetes research and treatment. Clin Pharmacol Ther
89(5):750–53.
Manohar, R., and E. Lagasse. 2009.Transdetermination: A new trend in cellular repro-
gramming. Mol Ther 17(6):936–38.
Marban, E. 2007. Big cells, little cells, stem cells: Agents of cardiac plasticity.Circ Res 100
(4):445–46.
Mathews, S. C., et al. 2010. A national study examining emergency medicine specialty
training and quality measures in the emergency department. Am J Med Qual 25(6):
429–35.
Mathiasen,A.B.,M.Haack-Sorensen, and J.Kastrup. 2009.Mesenchymal stromal cells for
cardiovascular repair: Current status and future challenges.Future Cardiol 5(6):605–17.
Milanetti, F., et al. 2010. Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for child-
hood autoimmune disease. Pediatr Clin North Am 57(1):239–71.
Miura, K., et al. 2009.Variation in the safety of induced pluripotent stem cell lines.Nat
Biotechnol 27(8):743–45.
22
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 22
Mooney, C. 2011.The science of why we don’t believe science: How our brains fool us
on climate, creationism, and the vaccine-autism link.Mother Jones (May/June). http://
motherjones.com/politics/2011/03/denial-science-chris-mooney?page=1.
Moretto-Zita, M., et al. 2010. Phosphorylation stabilizes nanog by promoting its inter-
action with Pin1. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 107(30):13312–17.
Mozid,A. M., et al. 2011. Stem cell therapy for heart diseases. Br Med Bull 98:143–59.
Muller-Ehmsen, J., et al 2006. Effective engraftment but poor mid-term persistence of
mononuclear and mesenchymal bone marrow cells in acute and chronic rat myocar-
dial infarction. J Mol Cell Cardiol 41(5):876–84.
Murry, C. E., et al. 2004. Haematopoietic stem cells do not transdifferentiate into cardiac
myocytes in myocardial infarcts.Nature 428(6983):664–68.
Nadal-Ginard, B., et al. 2003.Myocyte death, growth, and regeneration in cardiac hyper-
trophy and failure.Circ Res 92(2):139–50.
Nagaya, M., et al. 2009.Adult mouse intrahepatic biliary epithelial cells induced in vitro
to become insulin-producing cells. J Endocrinol 201(1):37–47.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). 2011.Health,United States, 2010:With spe-
cial feature on death and dying. Hyattsville, MD: NCHS.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). 2011a. Report grants: Applications, awards, success
rates, and total funding, by IC,mechanism, activity code, and funding source for 2010.
http://report.nih.gov/frrs/index.aspx.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). 2011b. NIH RePORT (research portfolio online
reporting tool). http://report.nih.gov/rcdc/categories/.
National Prevention Council. 2011. National prevention strategy. Washington, DC: U.S.
Dept. of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon General.
Naujok, O., et al. 2009. Changes in gene expression and morphology of mouse embry-
onic stem cells on differentiation into insulin-producing cells in vitro and in vivo.Dia-
betes Metab Res Rev 25(5):464–76.
Neshati, Z., et al. 2010. Differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells to insulin-producing
cells and their impact on type 1 diabetic rats. J Physiol Biochem 66(2):181–87.
Nesse, R.M., and G. C.Williams. 1998. Evolution and the origins of disease. Sci Am 279
(5):86–93.
Ngoc, P. K., et al. 2011. Improving the efficacy of type 1 diabetes therapy by transplan-
tation of immunoisolated insulin-producing cells.Hum Cell 24(2):86–95.
Nishio, J., et al. 2006. Islet recovery and reversal of murine type 1 diabetes in the absence
of any infused spleen cell contribution. Science 311(5768):1775–78.
Nygren, J. M., et al. 2004. Bone marrow-derived hematopoietic cells generate cardio-
myocytes at a low frequency through cell fusion, but not transdifferentiation.Nat Med
10(5):494–501.
Pinzon, A., et al. 2008. A re-assessment of erythropoietin as a neuroprotective agent
following rat spinal cord compression or contusion injury. Exp Neurol 213(1):129–36.
Pittenger,M. F., and B. J.Martin. 2004.Mesenchymal stem cells and their potential as car-
diac therapeutics.Circ Res 95(1):9–20.
Regaldo, A. 2011. Stem-cell gamble. Technol Rev (July/Aug.). http://www.technology
review.com/biomedicine/37787/?nlid=4625.
Roger,V. L., et al. 2011. Heart disease and stroke statistics. 2011 update: A report from
the American Heart Association.Circulation 123(4):e18–e209.
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 23
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 23
Rosengren, A. H., et al. 2009. Bone marrow transplantation stimulates pancreatic beta-
cell replication after tissue damage. Islets 1(1):10–18.
Ross, L. F., and L. H. Philipson. 2007. Ethics of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
in type 1 diabetes mellitus. JAMA 298(3):285; author reply, 285–86.
Rowland, J.W., et al. 2008. Current status of acute spinal cord injury pathophysiology
and emerging therapies: Promise on the horizon.Neurosurg Focus 25(5):E2.
Saketkhou, B. B., et al. 1997. Emergency department use of aspirin in patients with pos-
sible acute myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 127(2):126–29.
Schafer,M. 2009. From public understanding to public engagement: An empirical assess-
ment of changes in science coverage. Sci Commun 30(4):475–505.
Schuldiner, M., J. Itskovitz-Eldor, and N. Benvenisty. 2003. Selective ablation of human
embryonic stem cells expressing a “suicide” gene. Stem Cells 21(3):257–65.
Segers,V. F., and R.T. Lee. 2008. Stem-cell therapy for cardiac disease.Nature 451(7181):
937–42.
Shao, S., et al. 2011. Correction of hyperglycemia in type 1 diabetic models by transplan-
tation of encapsulated insulin-producing cells derived from mouse embryo progeni-
tor. J Endocrinol 208(3):245–55.
Shapiro, A. M., et al. 2006. International trial of the edmonton protocol for islet trans-
plantation. N Engl J Med 355(13):1318–30.
Sharp, K. G., et al. 2010.A re-assessment of a combinatorial treatment involving schwann
cell transplants and elevation of cyclic AMP on recovery of motor function following
thoracic spinal cord injury in rats. Exp Neurol (Dec 30). doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.
2010.12.020.
Silver, J., and J.H.Miller. 2004.Regeneration beyond the glial scar.Nat Rev Neurosci 5(2):
146–56.
Snarski, E., et al. 2011. Independence of exogenous insulin following immunoablation
and stem cell reconstitution in newly diagnosed diabetes type I. Bone Marrow Trans-
plant 46(4):562–66.
Sordi,V., et al. 2010. Mesenchymal cells appearing in pancreatic tissue culture are bone
marrow-derived stem cells with the capacity to improve transplanted islet function.
Stem Cells 28(1):140–51.
Stauffer, K. A. 2010. Anatomy and physiology for psychotherapists: Connecting body and soul.
NewYork: Norton.
Steward, O., et al. 2006. A re-assessment of the consequences of delayed transplantation
of olfactory lamina propria following complete spinal cord transection in rats. Exp
Neurol 198(2):483–99.
Steward, O., et al. 2008.A re-assessment of the effects of a nogo-66 receptor antagonist
on regenerative growth of axons and locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury in
mice. Exp Neurol 209(2):446–68.
Taneera, J., et al. 2006. Failure of transplanted bone marrow cells to adopt a pancreatic
beta-cell fate.Diabetes 55(2):290–96.
Thomas, K. E., and L. D. Moon. 2011.Will stem cell therapies be safe and effective for
treating spinal cord injuries? Br Med Bull 98:127–42.
Thonhoff, J. R., L. Ojeda, and P.Wu. 2009. Stem cell-derived motor neurons: Applica-
tions and challenges in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.Curr Stem Cell ResTher 4(3):178–
99.
24
Kathleen K. Eggleson
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 24
Thuret, S., L. D. Moon, and F. H. Gage. 2006.Therapeutic interventions after spinal cord
injury.Nat Rev Neurosci 7(8):628–43.
Tsuji, O., et al. 2010. Therapeutic potential of appropriately evaluated safe-induced
pluripotent stem cells for spinal cord injury. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 107(28):12704–9.
Tzukerman, M., et al. 2003. An experimental platform for studying growth and inva-
siveness of tumor cells within teratomas derived from human embryonic stem cells.
Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 100(23):13507–12.
Urbanek, K., et al. 2005. Cardiac stem cells possess growth factor-receptor systems that
after activation regenerate the infarcted myocardium, improving ventricular function
and long-term survival.Circ Res 97(7):663–73.
van der Bogt, K. E., et al. 2008. Comparison of different adult stem cell types for treat-
ment of myocardial ischemia.Circulation 118(14 suppl.):S121–S129.
Vardanyan, M., et al. 2010. Pancreas vs. islet transplantation: A call on the future. Curr
Opin Organ Transplant 15(1):124–30.
Voltarelli, J. C., et al. 2007.Autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plantation in newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus. JAMA 297(14):1568–76.
Voltarelli, J. C., et al. 2008. Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for type
1 diabetes. Ann NY Acad Sci 1150:220–29.
Wagner, R.T., et al. 2010. Stem cell approaches for the treatment of type 1 diabetes mel-
litus. Transl Res 156(3):169–79.
Wainwright, S. P., et al. 2006. From bench to bedside? biomedical scientists’ expectations
of stem cell science as a future therapy for diabetes. Soc Sci Med 63(8):2052–64.
Wen,Y., B. Chen, and S.T. Ildstad. 2011. Stem cell-based strategies for the treatment of
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Exp Opin Biol Ther 11(1):41–53.
Yanovski, S. Z., and J. A.Yanovski. 2011. Obesity prevalence in the United States: Up,
down, or sideways? N Engl J Med 364(11):987–89.
Yechoor,V., et al. 2009a. Gene therapy with neurogenin 3 and betacellulin reverses major
metabolic problems in insulin-deficient diabetic mice.Endocrinology 150(11):4863–73.
Yechoor,V., et al. 2009b.Neurogenin3 is sufficient for transdetermination of hepatic pro-
genitor cells into neo-islets in vivo but not transdifferentiation of hepatocytes. Dev
Cell 16(3):358–73.
Yeghiazarians,Y., et al. 2009. Injection of bone marrow cell extract into infarcted hearts
results in functional improvement comparable to intact cell therapy. Mol Ther 17(7):
1250–56.
Zalzman, M., L.Anker-Kitai, and S. Efrat. 2005. Differentiation of human liver-derived,
insulin-producing cells toward the beta-cell phenotype.Diabetes 54(9):2568–75.
Zhong, B., et al. 2011. Safeguarding nonhuman primate iPS cells with suicide genes.Mol
Ther 19(9):1667–75.
Stem Cell–Based Therapies
winter 2012 • volume 55, number 1 25
02_PBM55.1eggleson 1–25:03_51.3thagard 335– 2/15/12  6:22 PM  Page 25
