RESEARCH ARTICLE
Neuronal Release and Successful Astrocyte
Uptake of Aminoacidergic Neurotransmitters
After Spinal Cord Injury in Lampreys
Blanca Fernandez-Lopez, Silvia Marıa Valle-Maroto, Anton Barreiro-Iglesias,
and Marıa Celina Rodicio
In contrast to mammals, the spinal cord of lampreys spontaneously recovers from a complete spinal cord injury (SCI). Under-
standing the differences between lampreys and mammals in their response to SCI could provide valuable information to pro-
pose new therapies. Unique properties of the astrocytes of lampreys probably contribute to the success of spinal cord
regeneration. The main aim of our study was to investigate, in the sea lamprey, the release of aminoacidergic neurotrans-
mitters and the subsequent astrocyte uptake of these neurotransmitters during the first week following a complete SCI by
detecting glutamate, GABA, glycine, Hu and cytokeratin immunoreactivities. This is the first time that aminoacidergic neuro-
transmitter release from neurons and the subsequent astrocytic response after SCI are analysed by immunocytochemistry in
any vertebrate. Spinal injury caused the immediate loss of glutamate, GABA and glycine immunoreactivities in neurons close
to the lesion site (except for the cerebrospinal fluid-contacting GABA cells). Only after SCI, astrocytes showed glutamate,
GABA and glycine immunoreactivity. Treatment with an inhibitor of glutamate transporters (DL-TBOA) showed that neuronal
glutamate was actively transported into astrocytes after SCI. Moreover, after SCI, a massive accumulation of inhibitory neuro-
transmitters around some reticulospinal axons was observed. Presence of GABA accumulation significantly correlated with a
higher survival ability of these neurons. Our data show that, in contrast to mammals, astrocytes of lampreys have a high
capacity to actively uptake glutamate after SCI. GABA may play a protective role that could explain the higher regenerative
and survival ability of specific descending neurons of lampreys.
GLIA 2014;62:1254–1269
Key words: glia, glutamate, glycine, GABA, spinal cord injury, cytokeratin, regeneration
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) leads to loss of function and sen-sitivity below the lesion site in non-regenerating verte-
brates (e.g. mammals) and, so far, an appropriate therapy
does not exist. In other vertebrates (regenerating vertebrates),
such as lampreys (Cohen et al., 1986; Wood and Cohen,
1979; Yin and Selzer, 1983), fishes (Bernstein and Gelderd,
1970; Bunt and Fill-Moebs, 1984; Becker et al., 1997; Cog-
geshall et al., 1982) and amphibians (Davis et al., 1990; Lee,
1982) there is a process of spontaneous axonal regeneration
after SCI leading to functional recovery. Lampreys have been
used as a model of spontaneous spinal regeneration since the
late 1950s (Maron, 1959). They are the only vertebrates that
have been shown to satisfy the 5 NIH criteria to demonstrate
functional regeneration after SCI (Guth et al., 1980; Rodicio
and Barreiro-Iglesias, 2012). The high regenerative ability of
identifiable descending (reticulospinal) neurons confers them
several advantages respect to other models for studying the
factors that impede/facilitate spinal regeneration. In lampreys,
functional recovery after SCI is achieved not only due to
regeneration processes, but also to plastic and neuronal reor-
ganization events (Rodicio and Barreiro-Iglesias, 2012). This
is very important because recovery after SCI in humans will
also rely on neuronal circuit reorganization (Escların-De Ruz
et al., 2009). Interestingly, a recent study using TUNEL and
Fluoro Jade staining has shown that there is an almost
View this article online at wileyonlinelibrary.com. DOI: 10.1002/glia.22678
Published online April 15, 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). Accepted for publication Apr 3, 2014.
Address correspondence to Marıa Celina Rodicio, Departamento de Biologıa Celular y Ecologıa, Edificio CIBUS, Campus Vida, Universidad de Santiago
de Compostela, CP. 15782, Santiago de Compostela, A Coru~na, Spain. E-mail: mcelina.rodicio@usc.es
From the Department of Cell Biology and Ecology, CIBUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Blanca Fernandez-Lopez and Silvia Marıa Valle-Maroto contributed equally to this work.
1254 VC 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
complete lack of cell death in the sea lamprey spinal cord
during the first month after a complete spinal cord transec-
tion (Shifman et al., 2012).
In mammals, SCI causes a secondary response in the
spinal cord that involves the release of aminoacidergic neuro-
transmitters and a subsequent astrocyte reaction. Reactive
astrocytosis after CNS injury appears to be a conserved phe-
nomenon throughout vertebrate evolution (Larner et al.,
1995), which has suggested that this process could have selec-
tive survival advantages in mammals (Faulkner et al., 2004;
Karimi-Abdolrezaee and Billakanti, 2012). However, in spite
of this, it also leads to some detrimental effects like being an
obstacle for axonal regeneration (Karimi-Abdolrezaee and Bill-
akanti, 2012). Beneficial activities of astrocytes include clear-
ance of glutamate, c-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and glycine
(Seifert et al., 2006), which could protect neurons from exci-
totoxicity and cell death (Eulenburg and Gomeza, 2010). The
astrocytes of lamprey express cytokeratins (Merrick et al.,
1995), whereas, glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) is only
expressed by ependymal cells of the central canal (Wasowicz
et al., 1994). Even though a glial scar is present in lampreys
after SCI, it creates a permissive environment for axon
regrowth (Selzer, 1978). A system of inactivation of synapti-
cally released amino acid neurotransmitters is also present in
lampreys (Brodin and Grillner, 1985; Gundersen et al., 1995)
and the astrocytes appear to be involved in neurotransmitter
clearance, like in mammals (Baudoux and Parker, 2008). Spe-
cial properties of the astrocytes of lampreys could also be one
of the reasons that lead to a lack of cell death after SCI in
the lamprey spinal cord (Shifman et al., 2012).
Glutamate release after SCI causes glutamate excitotox-
icity (Liu et al., 1991), which can lead to neuronal and oligo-
dendrocyte death (Liu et al., 1999; Xu et al., 2004).
Glutamate uptake by astrocytes could protect neurons and
oligodendrocytes from excitotoxicity. However, in mammals,
a decrease in GLT1 (EAAT2) (the main glutamate transporter
of astrocytes) expression has been observed for at least 2
weeks following SCI (Lepore et al., 2011), while the extracel-
lular levels of glutamate rise to toxic levels in minutes (Liu
et al., 1991). An increase in glycine and GABA extracellular
levels after SCI has been also reported (Demediuk et al.,
1989; Panter et al., 1990). As previously suggested (Panter
et al., 1990), extracellular glycine could contribute to gluta-
mate excitotoxicity, since it is a coagonist of the N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor (Ransom and Stec,
1988). In contrast, GABA has been shown to have neuropro-
tective effects (Han et al., 2008).
The process of aminoacidergic neurotransmitter release
after SCI has not been studied in any regenerating species
and a direct histological observation of this phenomenon has
not been reported in any vertebrate either. Knowing how
regenerating vertebrates deal with this process could clearly
help to propose new lines of research or therapies to protect
the injured spinal cord from secondary damage. We aimed to
investigate the release of aminoacidergic neurotransmitters in
response to SCI and the subsequent astrocytic response in the
sea lamprey. Specifically, we studied: (1) the short-term
changes in cytokeratins expression (a marker of astrocytes in
lampreys) in response to a complete spinal cord transection;
(2) the changes in glutamate, glycine and GABA immunor-
eactivities that take place in the first week after SCI; (3) the
colocalization of glutamate, glycine and GABA with cytokera-
tins to investigate whether any of these neurotransmitters is
taken up by the astrocytes of lampreys after SCI; and (4) the
effect of DL-TBOA (an inhibitor of glutamate transporters)
on the active uptake of glutamate by astrocytes after SCI. We
present evidence showing that the astrocytes of lampreys have
a better response against glutamate release than those of
mammals and that, after SCI, GABA could play a role
favouring the survival of specific descending neurons.
Materials and Methods
Ethical Statement
All experiments were approved by the Bioethics Committee at the
University of Santiago de Compostela and conformed to the Euro-
pean Union and the Spanish guidelines on animal care and
experimentation.
Subjects
Mature and developmentally stable larval sea lampreys, Petromyzon
marinus L. (n5 45; between 80 and 156 mm in body length, 5 to 7
years of age), were used in the present study. Animals were collected
from the river Ulla (Galicia, northwestern Spain) with permission
from the Xunta de Galicia and maintained in aerated fresh water
aquaria at 15C with a bed of river sediment until their use for
experimental procedures.
Spinal Cord Transection
Animals were deeply anaesthetized by immersion in 0.1% tricaine
methanesulphonate (MS-222 ; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in Ringer
solution (pH 7.4) of the following composition: 137 mM NaCl, 2.9
mM KCl, 2.1 mM CaCl2, 2 mM HEPES. Larvae were placed with
their dorsal side up in a Sylgard-lined dish filled with Ringer solu-
tion. The spinal cord was exposed by a transverse incision made on
the body wall from the dorsal midline at the level of the 5th gill. A
complete spinal cord transection was performed with a scalpel at this
spinal level, and the spinal cord cut ends were visualized under a
microscope. After surgery, lampreys were maintained on ice for 1 h
to allow the wound to air dry (except for those processed immedi-
ately after the transection). During this hour, the animals were main-
tained in a paper towel soaked with Ringer solution not in direct
contact with the ice. After this time, the animals were allowed to
recover in aerated freshwater tanks at 19.5C. Lampreys are known
to be able to recover normal appearing locomotion at this
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1255
temperature (Cohen et al., 1999). Each transected animal was exam-
ined 24 h after surgery to confirm that there was no movement cau-
dal to site of injury. A spinal transection was considered complete if
on the stimulation of the head, the animal could move only its body
rostral to the lesion site.
Tissue Collection and Processing
After the different recovery periods [0 (n5 8), 1 (n5 8), 2 (n5 6), 3
(n5 6), 4 (n5 5), and 7 days after injury (n5 5)], animals were
deeply anaesthetized with 0.1% MS-222 in Ringer solution and killed
by decapitation. The body of the animal was fixed by immersion in
5% glutaraldehyde and 1% sodium metabisulfite (MB) in 0.05 M
Tris-buffered saline (TBS; pH 7.4) for 20 hours. After fixation, the
body region comprising the spinal cord between the 4th and the 6th
gills (i.e. 3.5 mm rostral and caudal to the site of injury) was cut and
embedded in Neg 50TM (Microm International GmbH, Walldorf,
Germany), frozen in liquid nitrogen-cooled isopentane, sectioned on a
cryostat in the transverse plane (14 mm thick) and mounted on Super-
frost VR Plus glass slides (Menzel, Braunschweig, Germany).
Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence, sections were pretreated with 0.2%
NaBH4 in deionized water for 45 minutes to quench autofluores-
cence. Sections were incubated with a cocktail of a mouse monoclo-
nal anti-GABA antibody (Sigma; 1: 1,200) or a mouse monoclonal
anti-glutamate antibody (Swant, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 1:1,000)
and a rabbit polyclonal anti-glycine antibody (Immunosolution, Jes-
mond, Australia; 1:3,000) or with a cocktail of a rabbit polyclonal
anti-GABA antibody (Affiniti, Mamhead, UK; 1:500) or a rabbit
polyclonal anti-glutamate antibody (Immunosolution; 1:4.500) or a
rabbit polyclonal anti-glycine antibody and a mouse monoclonal
anti-cytokeratin (LCM29) antibody (supplied by Dr. Selzer, Philadel-
phia; 1:100) or a mouse anti-HuC/HuD antibody (Molecular Probes
Europe, Leiden, The Netherlands; 1:100) in 0.05 M TBS with 1%
MB during 3 days at 4C. After rinsing in TBS with 1% MB, sec-
tions were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with Cy3- conju-
gated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA;
1:100) and fluorescein-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin
(Millipore, Temecula, CA; 1:100) rinsed in TBS and mounted with
Mowiol. All antibodies were diluted in TBS (pH 7.4) containing
0.2% Triton X-100 and 15% normal goat serum.
Antibodies
The mouse monoclonal anti-glutamate antibody was raised against
glutaraldehyde-linked L-glutamate-bovine serum albumin (BSA) con-
jugate by P. Streit (Liu et al., 1989), and this clone was made com-
mercially available through Swant. This antibody has been
characterized with respect to cross reactivity by antibody dilution
experiments as well as by absorption experiments (Adam and Csillaq,
2006) and it has been used in a previous study of lamprey spinal
cord (Fernandez-Lopez et al., 2012).
The polyclonal anti-glutamate antibody was raised in rabbit
against a glutamate- glutaraldehyde-porcine thyroglobin conjugate.
The antibody has been tested by the supplier in sections of retina
and cerebellum from various vertebrates, as well as in dot blot
immunoassays with a variety of amino acid-protein conjugates.
These include the standard 20 amino acids found in proteins, the
non-protein amino acids D-serine, D-alanine, and D -aspartate,
GABA and the glycine containing tripeptide glutathione, which did
not yield significant cross reactivity. This antibody has been devel-
oped by Dr. David V. Pow (University of Newcastle, New South
Wales, Australia) and used in previous studies of the lamprey brain
and spinal cord (Fernandez-Lopez et al., 2012; Villar-Cervi~no et al.,
2011, 2013). This antibody did not stain any sea lamprey brain
native protein band (Villar-Cervi~no et al., 2011).
The polyclonal anti-glycine antibody was raised against a
glycine-porcine thyroglobin conjugate and tested by the supplier in
sections of retina and cerebellum from various vertebrates as well as
in dot blot immunoassays with a variety of amino acids found in
proteins; the non-protein amino acids D-serine, D-alanine, and D-
aspartate; GABA; and the glycine-containing tripeptide glutathione,
which did not yield significant reactivity. This antibody has been
developed by Dr. David V. Pow (University of Newcastle, Australia)
and used in a number of studies on glycinergic neurons of the ret-
ina, brain, and spinal cord of the sea lamprey (Villar-Cervi~no et al.,
2008a, b, 2011).
The monoclonal anti-GABA antibody was raised against
GABA conjugated to BSA with glutaraldehyde and was evaluated by
the supplier for activity and specificity by use of dot blot immunoas-
say. No cross-reaction was observed with BSA, L-a-aminobutiric
acid, L-glutamic acid, L- aspartatic acid, glycine, d-aminovaleric acid,
L-theorine, L-glutamine, taurine, putrescine, L-alanine or carnosine.
The antibody showed weak cross-reaction with b-alanine. This anti-
body has been used in previous studies of the sea lamprey nervous
system (Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2009a, c; Valle-Maroto et al., 2011;
Villar-Cervi~no et al., 2008a,b).
The specificity of the polyclonal anti-GABA antiserum has been
characterized by ELISA by the supplier against conjugates with BSA-
glutaraldehyde. This antibody has been used in previous studies of
lampreys (Melendez-Ferro et al., 2002; Villar-Cervi~no et al., 2006).
Moreover, the anti-glycine, the polyclonal anti-GABA and the
monoclonal anti-GABA antibodies were tested by Western blotting
of lamprey brain protein extracts and they did not recognize any
brain native protein in blots (Villar-Cervi~no et al., 2006, 2008b).
The mouse monoclonal anti-cytokeratin antibody (LCM 29)
is a lamprey specific antibody that has been previously characterized
(Merrick et al., 1995) and used in studies about the spinal cord of
lampreys (Lurie et al., 1994; Uematsu et al., 2004; Vidal Pizarro
et al., 2004).
The mouse monoclonal anti-HuC/HuD antibody was raised
against the human neuronal proteins HuC and HuD and, as the
supplier stated, it binds specifically to antigens present exclusively in
neuronal cells and are thus useful as marker of neuronal cells in tis-
sue. It has been also used in lampreys as neuronal marker (Zhang
et al., 2014).
Treatment With an Inhibitor of Glutamate
Transporters
Animals were deeply anesthetized by immersion in 0.1% MS-222
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in Ringer solution and were placed with
1256 Volume 62, No. 8
their dorsal side up in a Sylgard-lined dish filled with Ringer. The
skin, the muscles and the meninx of the region comprised between
the 3rd and the 7th gill were carefully removed from the top of the
spinal cord; therefore, the spinal cord was completely exposed. Then,
the animals were maintained in Ringer solution with DMSO
(n5 3) or in 30 lM DL-threo-b-Benzyloxyaspartic acid (DL-TBOA;
Tocris Bioscience, UK) diluted in DMSO in Ringer during 4 h
(n5 4). The inhibitor DL-TBOA is a highly selective blocker of
excitatory aminoacid transporters, especially for EAAT1, EAAT2,
and EAAT3 (Shimamoto et al., 1998). After this incubation period,
a complete spinal cord transection was performed and the animals
were processed immediately after the transection as explained above.
Image Acquisition and Measurements
After immunofluorescence, the sections were photographed and ana-
lyzed with the spectral confocal microscopes TCS-SP2 and SP5
(Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Stacks of photographs were processed
with LITE and LAS software (Leica). Photographs were minimally
adjusted for brightness and contrast with Adobe Photoshop CS4
software.
The presence of inhibitory neurotransmitter accumulations
around descending axons (halos) was observed in larvae processed
between 1 and 3 dpl (n5 20). The percentage of axons with glycine
or GABA halos was calculated for the dorsal fascicle, lateral fascicle,
longitudinal medial fascicle and the Mauthner axons as follows: 10
alternative 14 mm sections of the first 300 mm rostral from the site
of injury were analyzed per animal. The mean number of halos for
each fascicle or Mauther axons was then calculated for each animal.
The percentage of halos per fascicle or Mauthner axons was calcu-
lated based on the total number of axons of the fascicles or Mauth-
ner axons (14 axons in the dorsal fascicle, 12 axons in the lateral
fascicle, 18 axons in the longitudinal medial fascicle and 2 Mauthner
axons). The final percentages were calculated as mean6 SEM from
the data from the 20 animals. The correlation (Pearson test) between
the presence of inhibitory neurotransmitter halos and the survival
ability of the descending neurons of each fascicle [see Shifman et al.,
2008: Dorsal fascicle (95.7 %), lateral fascicle (94.5 %), longitudinal
medial fascicle (56.7%) and Mauthner axons (29.0%)] was then cal-
culated. The statistical analysis was carried out with GraphPad (La
Jolla, CA).
Results
In control larval sea lampreys, with no SCI, the spinal cord
at the level of the 5th gill is flattened and the central canal
has a regular rounded profile. From 4 dpl some morphologi-
cal changes were observed in the central canal. In the first
400 to 600 mm rostral and caudal from the injury site, the
central canal was enlarged and acquired an irregular shape,
which is in agreement with previous reports (Selzer, 1978).
The expression of glutamate, GABA, glycine and cyto-
keratins in cells of the spinal cord of lampreys has been
already described [glutamate (Fernandez-Lopez et al., 2012;
Mahmood et al., 2009; Shupliakov et al., 1992), GABA
(Batueva et al., 1990; Brodin et al., 1990; Melendez-Ferro
et al., 2003; Ruiz et al., 2004; Robertson et al., 2007), gly-
cine (Gustafsson et al., 2002; Shupliakov et al., 1996; Villar-
Cervi~no et al., 2008b), cytokeratins (Lurie et al., 1994, Mer-
rick et al., 1995)] and can be observed in Fig. 1. Briefly, in
control larval sea lampreys glutamate (Fig.1A, E–G), GABA
(Fig.1B,H,I), and glycine (Fig.1C,J-L) immunoreactivities
were observed in cells of the dorsal (Fig. 1K,I) and lateral
(Fig. 1E,F,I,J, grey populations and in cerebrospinal fluid
contacting (CSFc) cells (Fig. 1G,H,L). As previously reported,
colocalization of glutamate and GABA or glycine (Fernandez-
Lopez et al., 2012), and glycine and GABA (Villar-Cervi~no
et al., 2008b) was observed in cells of some of these popula-
tions. Dorsal primary sensory cells (not shown) and individ-
ual cells located in the white matter (Fig. 1F), including edge
cells, were glutamate immunoreactive (-ir). Ventral edge cells
were also glycine-ir. The anti-cytokeratin antibody labeled the
cell bodies of astrocytes located in the grey matter (Fig. 1N),
the lateral funiculus (Fig. 1M), the perimeter of the giant
axons and also the astrocytic processes that course radially
(Fig. 1D,M). No cells around the central canal showed cyto-
keratin expression (Fig.1D). Figure 2 shows colocalization of
all the aminoacidergic neurotransmitters with Hu (neuronal
marker) (Fig. 2A-C00) and the absence of colocalization of
these neurotransmitters with cytokeratins (Fig. 2D-F00) in
control animals. This indicates that these neurotransmitters
are probably present in astrocytes at very low levels, which
precludes the observation of immunolabeling in control
animals.
Spinal cord injury led to a clear decrease in the expres-
sion of glutamate, glycine, and GABA in neurons and to their
accumulation in astrocytes in the regions adjacent to the
lesion site. Glutamate, glycine, and GABA immunoreactivity
was progressively maintained in neurons in more distal
regions from the site of injury. The changes observed during
the first week after the complete spinal cord transection are
shown in Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Neuronal and Astrocytic Acute Response on the
Day of Injury
At 0 dpl (immediately after the injury), glutamate was
released from neurons and their processes and was accumu-
lated in astrocytes in the rostral and caudal regions close to
the injury site. Neuronal cell bodies and fibers were not
glutamate-ir in the first 500 lm rostrally (Fig. 3A) and cau-
dally (Fig. 3B) from the lesion site, whereas astrocytes and
glial processes showed now glutamate immunoreactivity (Fig.
4A-A00). In more distal regions (from 500 lm to 3 mm from
the injury site), presence of glutamate immunoreactivity in
neuronal somata and processes increased progressively from
the lesion site, whereas astrocytes were glutamate-negative
[Fig. 3C (rostral); 3D (caudal)].
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1257
FIGURE 1: Confocal photomicrographs of transverse sections of the spinal cord of the sea lamprey showing glutamate, GABA, glycine and
cytokeratin (CK) immunoreactivities in control animals. A: Glutamate immunoreactivity. Outlined arrowheads point to neurons of the dorsal
population. Arrows point to neurons of the lateral population. Outlined arrows point to CSFc cells and arrowheads point to white matter neu-
rons. DC indicates the dorsal column. B: GABA immunoreactivity. C: Glycine immunoreactivity. D: CK immunoreactivity. Curved arrows point
to astrocytes. Note the absence of CK immunoreactivity in cells around the central canal. E-L: Details of glutamate-ir (E: Lateral population
cells. F: Lateral cell and cells located in the white matter. G: CSF-c cells. Star indicates the central canal.), GABA-ir (H: CSFc cells. I: Lateral and
dorsal population cells.) and glycine-ir (J: Lateral population cells. K: Dorsal grey population cells. L: CSFc cells.) neurons M, N: Details of CK
immunoreactivity. M: Astrocyte in the lateral funiculus. Note the astrocytic radial processes. Outlined curved arrow points to an astrocyte end-
foot. N: Astrocytes located in the grey matter. O: Schematic drawing showing the different neuronal populations observed in the lamprey spi-
nal cord. Orange medium sized circles indicate cells of the dorsal population. Green squares indicate cells of the lateral population. White
small circles indicate the CSFc cells. Purple big circles indicate edge cells. Blue stars indicate white matter cells. In all figures dorsal is at the
top. Lateral is on the left except for J, K in which lateral is on the right. Scale bars575 mm (A-D, O); 15 mm (E, F, I-N); 10 mm (G); 7.5 mm (H).
Based on this observations and to investigate whether
the astrocytes actively uptake neuronal glutamate in response
to SCI, complete spinal cord transections were carried out in
lampreys that were previously treated with DL-TBOA for 4
hours. Absence of glutamate immunoreactivity in neurons
was also observed in the first 500 mm rostrally and caudally
to the site of injury in control and treated animals. However,
absence of glutamate immunoreactivity in the astrocytes was
observed (Fig. 3F-F00) in DL-TBOA treated animals in con-
trast to controls, which showed glutamate immunoreactivity
in the astrocytes (Fig. 3G-G00). This indicated that glutamate
is actively accumulated in astrocytes by the action of gluta-
mate transporters after SCI.
The usual pattern of expression of glutamate immunore-
activity observed in the spinal cord of control samples was
observed from 3 mm from the transection site (data no
shown). Glutamate immunoreactivity was observed in at least
some cells of all the populations (dorsal, lateral and CSFc)
from 500 mm, both rostral and caudal from the lesion site.
Glutamate-ir primary sensory dorsal cells were observed from
FIGURE 2: High magnification photomicrographs showing details of double labeled neurons (arrowheads) for glutamate, glycine or
GABA and Hu and absence of colocalization between glutamate, glycine or GABA and CK in the spinal cord of control lampreys. A-A00:
Glycine-ir neurons. Arrows point to Hu single labeled neurons. B-B00: Glutamate-ir neurons. C-C00: GABA-ir neurons. D-D00: GABA-ir single
labeled neurons (arrows) and single labeled astrocytes immunoreactive to cytokeratins (arrowheads). E-E00: Glutamate-ir single labeled
neurons (arrows) and singled labeled astrocytes immunoreactive to cytokeratins. F-F00: Glycine-ir single labeled neurons (arrow). In all fig-
ures dorsal is at the top. Lateral is on the right, except for E-E00 in which lateral is on the left. A–F: Overlay; A’, F’: Glycine; B’, E’: Gluta-
mate; C’, D’: GABA; A00, B00, C00: Hu; D00, E00, F00: CK. Scale bars525 mm (C-C00); 20 mm (A-B00, D-F00).
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1259
600 to 900 mm from the injury site. Glutamate-ir edge cells
were observed for the first time at 600 mm from the lesion
site. These edge cells appear to maintain better their gluta-
mate expression rostrally to the lesion site, where they were
observed as often as in control samples, while caudally to the
injury, they were only occasionally observed. The rest of
white matter cells were observed occasionally as in control lar-
vae from 1 mm from the lesion site.
FIGURE 3: Confocal photomicrographs of transverse sections of spinal cord showing details of glutamate immunoreactivity at 0 dpl in trans-
ected animals (A-D), in DL-TBOA treated samples (F-F00) and in not treated samples (G-G00). A, B: Neurons and fibers glutamate-negative in
the adjacent region to the lesion site, rostral (A) and caudal (B). Note the presence of glutamate-ir astrocytes (arrows). C, D: Glutamate-ir
neurons (arrows) and fibers in the distal region from the injury site, rostral (C) and caudal (D). Note the absence of glutamate immunoreac-
tivity in astrocytes. DC indicates the dorsal column. E: Schematic drawing of a transverse section of the spinal cord showing the locations of
the photomicrographs in Figs. 3, 4, 5, and 6. F-F00: Glutamate negative astrocytes in DL-TBOA treated larval lampreys. G-G00: Glutamate-ir
astrocytes (arrowheads) in non-DL-TBOA treated larval lamprey. In all photographs, the star indicates the central canal and the asterisk indi-
cates the Mauthner axon. In all figures, dorsal is at the top and lateral is on the right. F, G: Overlay; F’, G’: Glutamate; F00, G00: CK. Scale
bars575 mm (E); 20 mm (A-D, F-F00, G-G00).
1260 Volume 62, No. 8
At 0 dpl, glycine was also released from neurons and neu-
ronal processes, whereas astrocytes showed strong glycine immu-
noreactivity rostrally and caudally in the first 300 mm from the
injury site (Fig. 4B-B00). After the first 300 lm from the lesion
site, glycine immunoreactivity was maintained in neurons and
neuronal processes. Between 300 and 350 lm from the site of
injury, glycine immunoreactivity was observed both in neurons
and astrocytes in the same spinal sections (Fig. 4G-G00).
Glycine-ir grey (dorsomedial, lateral and CSFc) and white mat-
ter (ventral edge cells) cell populations were clearly observed
from 350 lm to the site of injury. Caudally from 350 lm to
the site of injury onwards, glycine-ir ventral edge cells not
FIGURE 4: High magnification photomicrographs of transverse sections of spinal cord showing details of double immunolabeled astrocytes
(arrowheads) for glutamate, glycine or GABA and CK in larvae processed immediately after the injury. A-A00: Glutamate-ir astrocytes. B-B00:
Glycine-ir astrocytes. C-C00: GABA-ir astrocytes. D-D00: Double labeled astrocyte for glutamate and GABA. E-E00: Double labeled astrocyte
for glutamate and glycine. F-F00: Double labeled astrocyte for glycine and GABA. Note that GABA is only express in part of the astrocyte.
G-G00: Glycine-ir astrocytes and neurons (arrows). In all figures dorsal is at the top. Lateral is on the left except for B-B00, in which lateral is
on the right. A, B, C, D, E, F, G: Overlay; A’, D’, E00: Glutamate; B’, E’, F’, G’: Glycine; C’, D00, F00: GABA; A00, B00, C00, G00: CK. Scale bars520
mm (A-C00, G-G00); 10 mm (D-F00).
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1261
always showed colocalization with glutamate immunoreactivity
(see above). Therefore, caudally ventral edge cells appear to
maintain glycine expression better than glutamate expression.
At 0 dpl, GABA was released from most neuronal proc-
esses and populations, except for the CSFc GABA cells, in the
first 400 lm rostrally and caudally from the site of injury. In
these regions, astrocytes showed GABA immunoreactivity after
the injury (Fig. 4C-C00). Moreover, astrocytes showing colocali-
zation between two neurotransmitters were also observed at this
time point after the lesion (Fig. 4D-D00: glutamate and GABA;
4E-E00: glycine and glutamate; 4F-F00: glycine and GABA). In
contrast, the CSFc cells maintained their GABA immunoreactiv-
ity. The apical processes of CSFc cells were flattened and
strongly GABA-ir in the first sections from the injury site.
Moreover, they appeared to be lining the central canal (Fig. 5A).
The marginal neuropil, which is formed by the lateral processes
of the CSFc cells, was still GABA-ir after injury (Fig. 5B). It is
noteworthy that, unlike that observed for the GABA-ir CSFc
cells, the glutamate- and glycine-ir CSFc cells lost their immu-
noreactivity immediately after the lesion. Beyond the first 400
lm from the lesion site, other neuronal bodies and processes
(apart from the CSFc cells) began to maintain their GABA
immunoreactivity. Between 400 and 450 lm from the site of
injury, GABA-ir astrocytes and neurons could be observed in
the same spinal cord sections (Fig. 5C-C00). Between 400 and
600 lm from the site of injury, GABA immunoreactivity in the
dorsal and lateral grey matter populations and processes was
slightly lower than that of control samples. From the first 600
lm from the site of injury, the pattern of GABA immunoreac-
tivity was similar to that observed in control larvae, with cells of
all GABAergic populations being GABA-ir.
At 0 dpl, the complete spinal cord transection also led
to changes in cytokeratin expression that extended for about
500 lm rostral and caudal from the lesion site. The astrocytes
FIGURE 5: Confocal photomicrographs of transverse sections showing details of GABA and CK immunoreactivities and double immunola-
beled astrocytes (arrowheads) for glycine or GABA and CK. A: GABA-ir CSFc cells. Arrowhead points to a flattened apical process. The
star indicates the central canal. B: GABA immunoreactivity in the marginal neuropil (arrowhead). The asterisk indicates the Mauthner
axon. C-C00: GABA-ir astrocytes and neurons (arrows). D: CK-ir reactive astrocyte (arrow). E: CK-ir astrocyte processes with beaded
appearance (arrowheads). The star indicates the Mauthner axon. F: CK immunoreactivity with a dotted (arrowheads) appearance. Star
indicates the central canal. G, H: CK immunoreactivity beyond the adjacent region to the injury site, rostral (J) and caudal (K). I: CK-ir
processes with beaded appearance (arrowheads). The star indicates the central canal. J-J00: Glycine-ir astrocytes 1dpl. All photomicro-
graphs are from larvae processed immediately after the injury except J-J00. In all figures dorsal is at the top. Lateral is on the right
except for G, I and J-J00, in which lateral is on the left. C, J: Overlay; J’: Glycine; C’: GABA; C00, J00: CK. Scale bars540 mm (G, H); 20 mm
(A-F); 10 mm (I-J00).
1262 Volume 62, No. 8
became reactive acquiring a more rounded profile with wider
processes and showing intense immunoreactivity (Fig. 5D).
Some processes of astrocytes showed a beaded appearance
(Fig. 5F). From the first 500 lm from the site of injury
onwards, the cytokeratin expression was rather similar to that
observed in control animals [Fig. 5G (rostral) and 5H (cau-
dal)], although, processes with beaded appearance were occa-
sionally observed (Fig. 5I).
Changes from 1 to 7 dpl
The presence of glutamate immunoreactivity in astrocytes was
observed during the first six days following the complete SCI
(Fig. 6A) in the regions close to the site of injury. However,
the portion of the spinal cord in which astrocytes showed glu-
tamate immunoreactivity became progressively shorter over
the week reaching only 40–80 mm rostrally and caudally from
the lesion site at 7 dpl. At 7 dpl glutamate-ir astrocytes cell
bodies were not observed, but glial processes and end feet still
were glutamate-ir in the first 40–80 mm from the site of
injury (Fig. 6B). A pattern of glutamate immunoreactivity
similar to that of control larvae was observed from 3 mm
from the transection site in 1–2 dpl animals, from 1.5 mm in
3–4 dpl animals and from 200 mm in 7 dpl animals.
Glycine immunoreactivity was observed in astrocytes
until 1 dpl (Fig. 5J-J00), but they were glycine negative in lar-
vae processed 2 to 7 dpl. Interestingly, in the first 300 mm
from the site of injury, between 1 and 3 dpl, glycine appeared
to accumulate progressively to form a halo around some
descending axons in the dorsal (8.8% of the axons with halos)
and lateral (10.1% of the axons with halos) funicles and occa-
sionally around one of the giant axons coursing in the longi-
tudinal medial fascicle (3.8% of the axons with halos) or
around the Mauthner axon (7.7% of the Mauthner axons
with halos) (Figs. 6C,D and 7A). These halos did not show
cytokeratins immunoreactivity. The presence of glycine halos
did not correlate significantly with the subsequent survival
ability of the neurons of origin of these axons (Fig. 7C). A
pattern of glycine immunoreactivity similar to that of control
FIGURE 6: High magnification photomicrographs of transverse sections of spinal cord showing details of glutamate, glycine, GABA and
CK immunoreactivities in larvae processed 1–7dpl. A: Glutamate-ir astrocyte (arrow) 3 dpl. The asterisk indicates the Mauthner axon. B:
Glutamate-ir glial processes and end-feet (arrowheads) 7 dpl. C, D: Glycine-ir halos (arrowheads) surrounding axons of the dorsal (C) and
lateral (D) funicles. E: Glycine-ir cell (arrow) associated to a Mauthner axon (asterisk). F: Glycine-ir lateral edge cell (arrow). G: GABA-ir
halo (arrowhead) surrounding an axon of the dorsal funicle. H: CK-ir reactive astrocyte (arrow) 2 dpl. I: CK-ir processes of astrocytes
(arrowheads) transversally cut, 1dpl J: CK-ir astrocyte 3 dpl. Note the faint CK immunoreactivity in the perimeningeal ends. K: CK-ir
processes of astrocytes (arrowheads) transversally cut, 7dpl. L: CK immunoreactivity appearance at 7 dpl. Dorsal is at the top. Lateral is
on the left except for C, E, I, K and L, in which lateral is on the right. Scale bars520 mm (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K); 10 mm (J, L).
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1263
larvae was observed from 300 mm from the transection site in
1–4 dpl animals and from 80 mm in 7 dpl animals.
GABA immunoreactivity was not observed in neurons
located in the first 100 to 150 mm from the injury site
between 1 and 4 dpl, except for the CSFc cells that were
GABA-ir. At 1 dpl, GABA-ir astrocytic processes were
observed in the first 80 mm from the site of injury. At 2–7
dpl, GABA-ir was not observed in astrocytes. As observed for
FIGURE 7: Percentages of inhibitory neurotransmitter halos surrounding the axons of the dorsal (DF), lateral (LF), longitudinal medial
(LMF) fascicles and the Mauthner axons (MTH) of the spinal cord. A: Percentages of glycine-ir halos. B: Percentages of GABA-ir halos. C:
For each of the fascicles, the percentage of glycine (blue circles) and GABA (purple squares) halos were plotted against the percentage
of times the neurons originating the fascicles survive, as previously reported Shifman et al. (2008). The line represents the best fit linear
regeression (r250.29 for glycine-ir halos; r250.85 for GABA-ir halos). RS (reticulospinal). The asterisk indicates a significant correlation
(P<0.05). D: Schematic drawing of the spinal cord showing the different axonal fascicles and the Mauthner axons (Mth). DF: dorsal fasci-
cle; LMF: longitudinal medial fascicle; LF: lateral fascicle. Scale bar575 mm.
1264 Volume 62, No. 8
glycine, from 1 dpl to 3 dpl, GABA-ir/cytokeratin negative
halos were observed around descending axons (5.2% of the
axons in the dorsal funicle, 3.2% of the axons in the lateral
funicle, 0.8% of the giant axons in the medial longitudinal
fascicle and 0% in the Mauthner axons) (Figs. 6G and 7B).
A correlation between the presence of GABA-ir halos around
reticulospinal axons and the survival ability of the neurons
originating these axons (Shifman et al., 2008) was detected
(Pearson correlation coefficient, r5 0.92, P< 0.05; Fig. 7C).
A GABA pattern of expression similar to that of control lar-
vae was observed from 100 to 140 mm from the site of injury
and from the site of injury at 7 dpl.
Since 2 dpl, astrocytes began to down-regulate cytokera-
tin expression leading to an appearance similar to that of the
control samples. However, some reactive strongly cytokeratin-
ir astrocytes were still observed (Fig. 6H). From 1dpl, at the
border of the lesion, processes of astrocytes transversally cut
could be observed (Fig. 6I). These processes were more clearly
observed at 2 dpl (Fig. 6J) and 7 dpl (Fig. 6K). At 7 dpl, the
astrocytes looked like in control larvae, although some kind
of reorganization of the astrocyte processes or of the cytokera-
tin expression on them was observed; the perimeningeal ends
were faintly cytokeratin-ir, whereas perineuronal and periaxo-
nal processes were observed better than in control samples
(Fig. 6L).
Discussion
The short-term response in terms of aminoacidergic neuro-
transmitter expression following a complete SCI in the sea
lamprey has been studied for the first time. All the substances
studied [glutamate, GABA, glycine, and cytokeratins (a lam-
prey glial marker)] experienced alterations during the first
week following SCI. The main change was observed in the
regions adjacent to the lesion site and it mainly consisted of a
massive release of these aminoacidergic neurotransmitters by
neurons and their capture by astrocytes. In animals without
injury, immunoreactivity for these neurotransmitters was
exclusively observed in neurons, as it is shown by colocaliza-
tion with Hu immunoreactivity. No colocalization with cyto-
keratins was observed in control animals, probably reflecting
the very low levels of aminoacidergic neurotransmitters in
astrocytes under normal conditions. Furthermore, it was
observed that a particular cell population (CSFc cells) released
glutamate and glycine but not GABA after the injury.
Regarding the expression of cytokeratins, some changes
were also observed. Lurie et al. (1994) showed that from 7
dpl there were no differences in cytokeratins immunoreactiv-
ity, which is in agreement with our observations. This was
interpreted as a lack of glial reaction after SCI in the sea lam-
prey. However, we have observed that during the first 2–3
dpl, cytokeratins immunoreactivity increases and the astro-
cytes appeared enlarged. Similar features together with others,
such as molecular and functional changes in astrocytes, have
been observed in animals that suffer reactive astrogliosis and
glial scar formation (Sofroniew and Vinters, 2010). Present
observations in the sea lamprey suggest the occurrence of an
astrocytic reaction, which occurs in the first days after SCI.
Aminoacidergic Neurotransmitter Release by
Neurons and Their Capture by Astrocytes
Cytokeratins-expressing astrocytes have been observed in CNS
locations, which regenerate well after a lesion (Lurie et al.,
1994). Under normal physiological conditions, the concentra-
tions of glutamate in the extracellular space are tightly con-
trolled by some neuronal, EAAC1 (EAAT3) and glial, GLT1
(EAAT2) and GLAST (EAAT1) transporters (for a review see
Danbolt, 2001), being GLT1 the physiologically dominant
(Rothstein et al., 2005). Glutamate uptake is very important
because high extracellular glutamate levels result in excessive
activation of glutamate receptors, triggering massive Ca21
influx into cells and leading to neuronal death (Choi, 1988).
Following SCI in mammals, a massive release of glutamate
that raises it to excitotoxic levels within minutes has been
reported (Liu et al., 1999; McAdoo et al., 1999; Panter et al.,
1990; Xu et al., 2004). The increased levels of glutamate in
the extracellular space has been observed for periods of 3 to 4
days following traumatic injury in humans (Baker et al.,
1993; Bullock et al., 1995) and in other mammals it has
been shown that it can persist for 2 to 4 weeks after SCI
(Lepore et al., 2011; Olsen et al., 2010). It has been shown
that glutamate release after CNS injury in mammals is mainly
produced by means of reversed uptake (McAdoo et al., 2000;
Rossi et al., 2000; Szatkowski et al., 1990), contributing to
increase glutamate excitotoxicity. Lepore et al. (2011) have
also reported the existence of apoptosis of GLT1-expressing
astrocytes, down-regulation of GLT1 expression in surviving
astrocytes and lack of GLT1 expression in reactive/proliferat-
ing astrocytes after SCI in mammals.
In this work, we present clear evidence suggesting a
massive release of glutamate from neurons after SCI in lamp-
reys. Moreover, glutamate immunoreactivity was observed in
astrocytes during the first week after a complete transection
of the cord indicating that glutamate uptake by astrocytes
works properly after SCI. Treatment with the glutamate trans-
porter inhibitor DL-TBOA showed that astrocytes of lamp-
reys actively uptake glutamate after SCI. This shows that in
contrast to mammals (Lepore et al., 2011), glutamate trans-
porters of lampreys continue working properly after SCI. A
recent study has shown that in lampreys there is an amazing
lack of death of intrinsic spinal cord cells in the first days
after a complete SCI (Shifman et al., 2012). So, we suggest
that the successful and active astrocytic uptake of glutamate
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1265
could be one of the main reasons to explain the absence of
cell death in lampreys after SCI. Further investigation to elu-
cidate why in contrast to mammals the glutamate transporters
of astrocytes of lampreys maintain their functionality after
SCI is needed. This could provide clues to propose new
therapies to prevent secondary damage after SCI.
In the first 24 h following SCI, glycine and GABA
immunoreactivities were also observed in the astrocytes of the
sea lamprey. In mammals, a rise in extracellular levels of gly-
cine and GABA has been reported after SCI (Panter et al.,
1990). It is known that glycine is also involved in excitatory
glutamatergic neurotransmission (review in Zafra and
Gimenez, 2008). Glycine is a mandatory co-agonist for the
activation of NMDA glutamate receptors (Johnson and
Ascher, 1987). So, the increase in extracellular levels of gly-
cine following SCI could potentiate excitotoxicity (Panter
et al., 1990). Our observations demonstrating glycine uptake
by astrocytes immediately after SCI indicate that this could
help prevent the potentiation of glutamate excitotoxicity in
lampreys.
In contrast to the toxic effects of high glutamate and
glycine extracellular levels, GABA has been shown to exert
neuroprotective effects (Chen-Xu et al., 2000; Han et al.,
2008; O’Connell et al., 2001; Yang et al., 2000). In our
study, GABA was observed to accumulate in astrocytes in the
first 24 hours after SCI. Of the 3 aminoacidergic neurotrans-
mitters studied here, GABA was the first one to recover the
immunoreactivity pattern observed in control samples, which
may help to achieve functional recovery. Actually, a recent
study has shown that raised endogenous GABA levels after a
complete SCI in lampreys can be related to a better recovery
of function (Svensson et al., 2013).
Sustained Expression of GABA in CSFc Cells
In contrast to other cell types and neurotransmitters, the
CSFc GABAergic cells of lampreys do not lose GABA immu-
noreactivity after SCI in the regions around the injury site.
Interestingly, their strong GABA-ir apical dendrites show a
change of morphology. Their apical portions become flattened
and appear to line almost all the central canal perimeter. In
contrast, in the eel, no morphological changes of the apical
dendrites have been reported (Dervan and Roberts, 2003).
The persistence of GABA immunoreactivity in these cells
raises the question of whether GABA released by CSFc cells
may influence regeneration in lampreys. It could act by offer-
ing protection or by promoting regeneration; both actions
being not exclusive. The CSFc cells are the first GABAergic
cells detected in the developing spinal cord (Melendez-Ferro
et al., 2003). GABA acts as a factor that modulates several
essential developmental processes (for a revision see Owens
and Kriegstein 2002), most but all of them being necessary
to achieve regeneration. The specific persistence of GABA
expression in CSFc cells suggests that, after SCI in the sea
lamprey, GABA could play a role similar to that played dur-
ing development to achieve regeneration.
The function of the apical dendrites of the CSFc cells is
not clear. They appear to be chemosensitive (Huang et al.,
2006) by detecting changes in the CSF composition, but
other functions such as mechanoreception or secretion have
also been proposed (Vıgh et al., 2004). The flattening and
rearrangement of the apical dendrites to line part of the cen-
tral canal perimeter indicates that they respond to injury and
that they could be playing new roles during regeneration. For
example, forming a physical barrier between the interior of
the central canal and the extracellular spaces of the spinal
cord. It could also be related to other changes in the central
canal. For example, the Reissner’s fibre of the central canal is
interrupted after injury and its newly produced material is
accumulated at the site of injury (Barreiro-Iglesias et al.,
2009b). The Reissner’s fibre contains, binds and transports
away developmental and molecular signals such as subcom-
missural organ-spodin, dopamine and serotonin (Caprile
et al., 2003; Gobron et al., 2000). So, their accumulation
could be related to the changes in the apical dendrites of
CSFc cells.
Accumulation of Inhibitory Neurotransmitters
around Identifiable Reticulospinal Descending
Axons
A surprising result of our study is the observation of intense
glycine and GABA immunoreactive halos around some of the
reticulospinal descending axons in response to injury. The
reticulospinal system plays a predominant role in the control
of locomotion (Grillner et al., 2008). The strong accumula-
tion of inhibitory neurotransmitters around reticulospinal
axons close to the injury site suggests that they could play a
role in the fate of reticulospinal neurons. It is known that dif-
ferent identifiable reticulospinal neurons of lampreys have dif-
ferent regenerative (Jacobs et al., 1997) and survival abilities
after SCI (Barreiro-Iglesias and Shifman, 2012; Shifman
et al., 2008). Here, we determined the proportion of axons
having inhibitory halos around them in different types of
descending axons to compare these data with the percentages
of times that the corresponding descending neurons survive
several weeks after SCI. Rovainen reported the stereotypic
location of identifiable reticulospinal axons in the spinal cord
of lampreys (Rovainen, 1976; Fig. 7D). The survival ability
of the identifiable reticulospinal neurons has been reported by
Shifman et al. (2008) 12 months after a spinal cord transec-
tion at the level of the 5th gill. The Mauthner cells, whose
axons course in the lateral fascicle, and the M€uller cells,
whose axons course in the medial longitudinal fascicle, are
1266 Volume 62, No. 8
bad survivors (with a probability of survival/regeneration of
less than 60%). However, the accessory Mauthner cells and
other identifiable reticulospinal neurons, whose axons course
mainly in the dorsal and also in the lateral fascicles, are good
survivors (with a probability of survival/regeneration of more
than 60%) (Shifman et al., 2008). A significant and positive
correlation between the presence of GABA-ir halos around
the reticulospinal axons and the survival ability of the corre-
sponding reticulospinal neurons was observed. This strongly
suggests a role for GABA in protecting these neurons at the
site of axotomy. Interestingly, we have recently reported that
caspase activation in descending axons at the site of injury
precedes the activation of caspases in the neuronal bodies of
these neurons (Barreiro-Iglesias and Shifman, in press). The
accumulation of extracellular GABA around reticulospinal
axons may be due to a regulated increase in the production
and release of inhibitory neurotransmitters to hyperpolarize
axons. Keeping the descending axons hyperpolarized may pro-
tect against excitotoxicity, counteracting harmful effects that
could lead to retrograde neuronal death (Saransaari and Oja,
1997).
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
In summary, the results of our study demonstrate that the
astrocytes of lampreys have a high capacity of glutamate
uptake after SCI, which is maintained during the first days
after a complete transection of the cord. In addition, CSFc
cells maintain their GABA expression in spite of the injury
and inhibitory neurotransmitters accumulate around the
axons of good survivor/regenerator reticulospinal neurons. All
these factors appear to contribute to the impressive regenera-
tive and survival capacity of the spinal cord of lampreys.
Acknowledgment
Grant sponsor: Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation;
Grant number: BFU2010–17174; ABI was supported by a
postdoctoral fellowship from the Xunta de Galicia.
The authors thank the staff of Ximonde Biological Station
for providing lampreys used in this study and Dr. Selzer
(Temple University) for providing the anti-cytokeratin anti-
body. They also thank the Microscopy Service (University of
Santiago de Compostela) for confocal microscope facilities.
References
Adam AS, Csillaq A. 2006. Differential distribution of L-Aspartato and L-
glutamate-immunoreactive structures in the arcopallium and medium stria-
tum of the domestic chick (Gallus domesticus). J Comp Neurol 498:266–
276.
Baker AJ, Moulton RJ, MacMillan VH, Shedden PM. 1993. Excitatory amino
acids in cerebrospinal fluid following traumatic brain injury in humans. J Neu-
rosurg 79:369–372.
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Shifman MI. 2012. Use of fluorochrome-labeled inhibitors
of caspases to detect neuronal apoptosis in the whole-mounted lamprey
brain after spinal cord injury. Enzyme Res 2012:835731.
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Shifman MI. In press. Detection of activated caspase-8 in
injured spinal axons by using fluorochrome-labeled inhibitors of caspases
(FLICA). In: Merighi A, Lossi L, editors. Neuronal cell death: Methods and
protocols. Series: Methods in molecular biology. New York, NY: Humana
Press.
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Cornide-Petronio ME, Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2009a.
Serotonin and GABA are colocalized in restricted groups of neurons in the
larval sea lamprey brain: Insights into the early evolution of neurotransmitter
colocalization in vertebrates. J Anat 215:435–443.
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Villar-Cervi~no V, Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2009b. A mono-
clonal antibody as a tool to study the subcommissural organ and Reissner’s
fibre of the sea lamprey: An immunofluorescence study before and after a
spinal cord transection. Neurosci Lett 464:34–38.
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Villar-Cervi~no V, Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2009c. Dopa-
mine and gamma-aminobutyric acid are colocalized in restricted groups of
neurons in the sea lamprey brain: Insights into the early evolution of neuro-
transmitter colocalization in vertebrates. J Anat 215:601–610.
Batueva V, Suderevskaya EI, Vesselkin NP, Pierre J, Reperant J. 1990. Local-
isation of GABA-immunopositive cells in the river lamprey spinal cord. J Hirn-
forsch 31:739–745.
Baudoux S, Parker D. 2008. Glial-toxin-mediated disruption of spinal cord
locomotor network function and its modulation by 5-HT. Neuroscience 153:
1332–1343.
Becker T, Wullimann MF, Becker CG, Bernhardt RR, Schachner M. 1997. Axo-
nal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebrafish. J Comp Neurol
377:577–595.
Bernstein J, Gelderd JB. 1970. Regeneration of the long spinal tracts in the
goldfish. Brain Res 20:33–38.
Brodin L, Grillner S. 1985. The role of putative excitatory amino acid neuro-
transmitters in the initiation of locomotion in the lamprey spinal cord. II. The
effects of amino acid uptake inhibitors. Brain Res 360:149–158.
Brodin L, Dale N, Christenson J, Storm-Mathisen J, H€okfelt T, Grillner S.1990.
Three types of GABA-immunoreactive cells in the lamprey spinal cord. Brain
Res 508:172–175.
Bullock R, Zauner A, Myseros JS, Marmarou A, Woodward JJ, Young HF. 1995.
Evidence for prolonged release of excitatory amino acids in severe human
head trauma. Relationship to clinical events. Ann N Y Acad Sci 765:290–297.
Bunt SM, Fill-Moebs P. 1984. Selection of pathways by regenerating spinal
cord fiber tracts. Brain Res 318:307–311.
Caprile T, Hein S, Rodrıguez S, Montecinos H, Rodrıguez E. 2003. Reissner
fiber binds and transports away monoamines present in the cerebrospinal
fluid. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 110:177–192.
Chen-Xu W, Yi Y, Qiu L, Shuaib A. 2000. Neuroprotective activity of tiagabine
in a focal embolic model of cerebral ischemia. Brain Res 874:75–77.
Choi DW. 1988. Glutamate neurotoxicity and diseases of the nervous system.
Neuron 1:623–634.
Coggeshall RE, Birse SG, Youngblood CS. 1982. Recovery from spinal trans-
ection in fish. Neurosci Lett 32:259–264.
Cohen AH, Kienel T, Pate V, Blinder J, Guan L. 1999. Temperature can alter
the function outcome of spinal cord regeneration in larval lampreys. Neuro-
science 90: 957–965.
Cohen AH, Mackler SA, Selzer ME. 1986. Functional regeneration following
spinal transection demonstrated in the isolated spinal cord of the larval sea
lamprey. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83:2763–2766.
Danbolt NC. 2001. Glutamate uptake. Prog Neurobiol 65:1–105.
Davis BM, Ayers JL, Koran L, Carlson J, Anderson MC, Simpson SB Jr. 1990.
Time course of salamander spinal cord regeneration and recovery of swimming:
HRP retrograde pathway tracing and kinematic analysis. Exp Neurol 108:198–213.
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1267
Demediuk P, Daly MP, Faden AI. 1989. Effect of impact trauma on neuro-
transmitter and nonneurotransmitter amino acids in rat spinal cord. J Neuro-
chem 52:1529–1536; Erratum: 54:724–725.
Dervan AG, Roberts BL. 2003. Reaction of spinal cord central canal cells to
cord transection and their contribution to cord regeneration. J Comp Neurol
458:293–306.
Escların-De Ruz A, Alcobendas-Maestro M, Casado-Lopez R, Mu~noz-Gonzalez
A, Florido-Sanchez MA, Gonzalez-Valdizan E. 2009. A robotic system for gait
re-education in patients with an incomplete spinal cord injury. Rev Neurol 49:
617–622.
Eulenburg V, Gomeza J. 2010. Neurotransmitter transporters expressed in
glial cells as regulators of synapse function. Brain Res Rev 63:103–112.
Faulkner JR, Herrmann JE, Woo MJ, Tansey KE, Doan NB, Sofroniew MV.
2004. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal
cord injury. J Neurosci 24:2143–2155.
Fernandez-Lopez B, Villar-Cervi~no V, Valle-Maroto SM, Barreiro-Iglesias A,
Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2012. The glutamatergic neurons in the spinal cord
of the sea lamprey: An in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical study.
PLoSOne 7(10):e47898.
Gobron S, Creveaux I, Meiniel R, Didier R, Herbet A, Bamdad M, El Bitar F,
Dastugue B, Meiniel A. 2000. Subcommissural organ/Reissner’s fiber com-
plex: Characterization of SCO-spondin, a glycoprotein with potent activity on
neurite outgrowth. Glia 32:177–191.
Grillner S, Wallen P, Saitoh K, Kozlov A, Robertson B. 2008. Neural bases of
goal-directed locomotion in vertebrates—An overview. Brain Res Rev 57:2–12.
Gundersen V, Shupliakov O, Brodin L, Ottersen OP Storm-Mathisen J. 1995.
Quantification of excitatory amino acid uptake at intact glutamatergic synap-
ses by immunocytochemistry of exogenous D-aspartate. J Neurosci 15:4417–
4428.
Gustafsson JS, Birinyi A, Crum J, Ellisman M, Brodin L, Shupliakov O. 2002.
Ultrastructural organization of lamprey reticulospinal synapses in three dimen-
sions. J Comp Neurol 450:167–182.
Guth L, Brewer CR, Collins WF Jr, Goldberger ME, Perl ER. 1980. Criteria for
evaluating spinal cord regeneration experiments. Exp Neurol 69:1–3.
Han D, Zhang QG, Yong-Liu, Li C, Zong YY, Yu CZ, Wang W, Yan JZ, Zhang
GY. 2008. Co-activation of GABA receptors inhibits the JNK3 apoptotic path-
way via the disassembly of the GluR6-PSD95-MLK3 signaling module in cere-
bral ischemic-reperfusion. FEBS Lett 582:1298–1306.
Huang AL, Chen X, Hoon MA, Chandrashekar J, Guo W, Tr€ankner D, Ryba
NJ, Zuker CS. 2006. The cells and logic for mammalian sour taste detection.
Nature 442:934–938.
Jacobs AJ, Swain GP, Snedeker JA, Pijak DS, Gladstone LJ, Selzer ME. 1997.
Recovery of neurofilament expression selectively in regenerating reticulospi-
nal neurons. J Neurosci 17:5206–5220.
Johnson JW, Ascher P. 1987. Glycine potentiates the NMDA response in cul-
tured mouse brain neurons. Nature 325:529–531.
Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Billakanti R. 2012. Reactive astrogliosis after spinal
cord injury-beneficial and detrimental effects. Mol Neurobiol 46:251–264.
Larner AJ, Johnson AR, Keynes RJ. 1995. Regeneration in the vertebrate cen-
tral nervous system: Phylogeny, ontogeny, and mechanisms. Biol Rev 70:597–
619.
Lee MT. 1982. Regeneration and functional reconnection of an identified ver-
tebrate central neuron. J Neurosci 2:1793–1811.
Lepore AC, O’Donnell J, Bonner JF, Paul C, Miller ME, Rauck B, Kushner RA,
Rothstein JD, Fischer I, Maragakis NJ. 2011. Spatial and temporal changes in
promoter activity of the astrocyte glutamate transporter GLT1 following trau-
matic spinal cord injury. J Neurosci Res 89:1001–1017.
Liu CJ, Grands P, Matute C, Cuenod M, Streid P. 1989. Glutamate-like immu-
noreactivity revealed in rat olfactory bulb, hippocampus and cerebellum by
monoclonal antibody and sensitive staining method. Histochemistry 90:427–
445.
Liu D, Thangnipon W, McAdoo DJ. 1991. Excitatory amino acids rise to toxic
levels upon impact injury to the rat spinal cord. Brain Res 547:344–348.
Liu D, Xu GY, Pan E, McAdoo DJ. 1999. Neurotoxicity of glutamate at the
concentration released upon spinal cord injury. Neuroscience 93:1383–1389.
Lurie DI, Pijak DS, Selzer ME. 1994. Structure of reticulospinal axon growth
cones and their cellular environment during regeneration in the lamprey spi-
nal cord. J Comp Neurol 344:559–580.
Mahmood R, Restrepo CE, el Manira A. 2009. Transmitter phenotypes of
commissural interneurons in the lamprey spinal cord. Neuroscience 164:
1057–1067.
Maron K. 1959. Regeneration capacity of the spinal cord in Lampetra fluviati-
lis larvae. Folia Biol 7:179–189.
McAdoo DJ, Xu GY, Robak G, Hughes MG. 1999. Changes in amino acid
concentrations over time and space around an impact injury and their diffu-
sion through the rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol 159:538–544.
McAdoo DJ, Xu G, Robak G, Hughes MG, Price EM. 2000. Evidence that
reversed glutamate uptake contributes significantly to glutamate release fol-
lowing experimental injury to the rat spinal cord. Brain Res 865:283–285.
Melendez-Ferro M, Perez –Costas E, Villar-Cheda B, Abalo XM, Rodrıguez-
Mu~noz R, Rodicio MC, Anadon R. 2002. Ontogeny of gamma-aminobutyric
acid-immunoreactive neural population in the forebrain and midbrain of the
sea lamprey. J Comp Neurol 446:360–376.
Melendez-Ferro M, Perez-Costas E, Villar-Cheda B, Rodrıguez- Mu~noz,
Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2003. Ontogeny of gamma-aminobutyric acid-immur-
eactive neurons in the rhombencephalon and spinal cord of the sea lamprey.
J Comp Neurol 464:17–35.
Merrick SE, Pleasure SJ, Lurie DI, Pijak DS, Selzer ME, Lee VM. 1995. Glial
cells of the lamprey nervous system contain keratin-like proteins. J Comp
Neurol 355:199–210.
O’Connell AW, Fox GB, Kjller C, Gallagher HC, Murphy KJ, Kelly J, Regan
CM. 2001. Anti-ischemic and cognition-enhancing properties of NNC-711, a
gamma-aminobutyric acid reuptake inhibitor. Eur J Pharmacol 424:37–44.
Olsen ML, Campbell SC, McFerrin MB, Floyd CL, Sontheimer H. 2010. Spinal
cord injury causes a wide-spread, persistent loss of Kir4.1 and glutamate
transporter 1: Benefit of 17 beta-oestradiol treatment. Brain 133:1013–1025.
Owens DF, Kriegstein AR. 2002. Is there more to gaba than synaptic inhibi-
tion? Nat Rev Neurosci 3:715–727.
Panter SS, Yum SW, Faden AI. 1990. Alteration in extracellular amino acids
after traumatic spinal cord injury. Ann Neurol 27:96–99.
Ransom RW, Stec NL. 1988. Cooperative modulation of [3H]MK-801 binding
to the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-ion channel complex by L-glutamate,
glycine, and polyamines. J Neurochem 51:830–836.
Robertson B, Anclair F, Menard A, Grillner S, Dubuc R. 2007. GABA distribu-
tion in lamprey is phylogenetically conserved. J Comp Neurol 503:47–63.
Rodicio MC, Barreiro-Iglesias A. 2012. [Lampreys as an animal model in
regeneration studies after spinal cord injury]. Rev Neurol 55:157–66. Spanish.
Rossi DJ, Oshima T, Attwell D. 2000. Glutamate release in severe brain
ischaemia is mainly by reversed uptake. Nature 403:316–321.
Rothstein JD, Patel S, Regan MR, Haenggeli C, Huang YH, Bergles DE, Jin L,
Dykes Hoberg M, Vidensky S, Chung DS, Toan SV, Bruijn LI, Su ZZ, Gupta P,
Fisher PB. 2005. Beta-lactam antibiotics offer neuroprotection by increasing
glutamate transporter expression. Nature 433:73–77.
Rovainen CM. 1976. Regeneration of M€uller and Mauthner axons after spinal
transection in larval lampreys. J Comp Neurol 168:545–554.
Ruiz Y, Pombal MA, Megıas M. 2004. Development of GABA immunoreactive
cells in the spinal cord of the sea lamprey, P. marinus. J Comp Neurol 470:
151–163.
Saransaari P, Oja SS. 1997. Enhanced GABA release in cell-damaging condi-
tions in the adult and developing mouse hippocampus. Int J Dev Neurosci
15:163–174.
1268 Volume 62, No. 8
Seifert G, Schilling K, Steinhauser C. 2006. Astrocyte dysfunction in neurolog-
ical disorders: A molecular perspective. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:194–206.
Selzer ME. 1978. Mechanisms of functional recovery and regeneration after
spinal cord transection in larval sea lamprey. J Physiol 277:395–408.
Shifman MI, Zhang G, Selzer ME. 2008. Delayed death of identified reticulospi-
nal neurons after spinal cord injury in lampreys. J Comp Neurol 510:269–282.
Shifman MI, Ognissanti C, He L, Laramore C. 2012. Surprising lack of cell
death in lamprey spinal cord after injury. Program No. 550.03/I7. Neuro-
science Meeting Planner. New Orleans, LA: Society for Neuroscience. Online.
Shimamoto K, Lebrun B, Yasuda-Kamatani Y, Sakaitani M, Shigeri Y, Yumoto
N, Nakajima T. 1998. DL-threo-beta-benzyloxyaspartate, a potent blocker of
excitatory amino acid transporters. Mol Pharmacol 53:195–201.
Shupliakov O, Brodin L, Cullheim S, Ottersen OP, Storm-Mathisen J. 1992.
Immunogold quantification of glutamate in two types of excitatory synapse
with different firing patterns. J Neurosci 12:3789–3803.
Shupliakov O, Fagersted P, Ottersen OP, Storm-Mathiesen J, Grillner S,
Brodin L. 1996. Immunocytochemical localization of glycine in the lamprey
spinal cord with reference to GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses: A light
and electron microscopic study. Acta Biol Hung 47:393–410.
Sofroniew MV, Vinters HV. 2010. Astrocytes: Biology and pathology. Acta
Neuropathol 119:7–35.
Svensson E, Kim O, Parker D. 2013. Altered GABA and somatostatin modula-
tion of proprioceptive feedback after spinal cord injury in lamprey. Neuro-
science 235:109–118.
Szatkowski M, Barbour B, Attwell D. 1990. Non-vesicular release of glutamate
from glial cells by reversed electrogenic glutamate uptake. Nature 348:443–446.
Uematsu H, Popescu A, Zhang G, Wright AC, Wehrli SL, Takahashi M, Wehrli
FW, Selzer ME, Hackney DB. 2004. Magnetization transfer micro-MR imaging
of live excised lamprey spinal cord: Characterization and immunohistochemi-
cal correlation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 25:1816–1820.
Valle-Maroto SM, Fernandez-Lopez B, Villar-Cervi~no V, Barreiro-Iglesias A,
Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2011. Inhibitory descending rhombencephalic projec-
tions in larval sea lamprey. Neuroscience 194:1–10.
Vidal Pizarro I, Swain GP, Selzer ME. 2004. Cell proliferation in the lamprey
central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 469:298–310.
Vıgh B, Manzano e Silva MJ, Frank CL, Vincze C, Czirok SJ, Szabo A, Lukats
A, Szel A. 2004. The system of cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons. Its
supposed role in the nonsynaptic signal transmission of the brain. Histol His-
topathol 19:607–628.
Villar-Cervi~no V, Abalo XM, Villar-Cheda B, Melendez-Ferro M, Perez-Costas E,
Holstein GR, Martinelli GP, Rodicio MC, Anadon R. 2006. Presence of gluta-
mate, glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid in the retina of the larval sea lam-
prey: Comparative immunohistochemical study of classical neurotransmitters in
the larval and postmetamorphic retina. J Comp Neurol 499:810–827.
Villar-Cervi~no V, Barreiro Iglesias A, Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2008a. Distribu-
tion of glycine immunoreactivity in the brain of adult sea lamprey (Petromy-
zon marinus). Comparison with gamma-aminobutyric acid. J Comp Neurol
507:1441–1463.
Villar-Cervi~no V, Barreiro-Iglesias A, Fernandez-Lopez B, Mazan S, Rodicio
MC, Anadon R. 2013. Glutamatergic neuronal populations in the brainstem
of the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus: An in situ hybridization and immu-
nocytochemical study. J Comp Neurol 521:522–557.
Villar-Cervi~no V, Barreiro-Iglesias A, Mazan S, Rodicio MC, Anadon R. 2011.
Glutamatergic neuronal population in the forebrain of the sea lamprey, Petro-
myzon marinus: An in situ hybridization and immunocytochemical study. J
Comp Neurol 519:1712–1735.
Villar-Cervi~no V, Holstein GR, Martinelli GP, Anadon R, Rodicio MC. 2008b.
Glycine-immunoreactivity in the developing spinal cord of the sea lamprey:
Comparison with the gamma-aminobutyric acidergic system. J Comp Neurol
508:112–130.
Wasowicz M, Pierre J, Reperant J, Ward R, Vesselkin NP, Versaux-Botteri C.
1994. Immunoreactivity to glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) in the brain and
spinal cord of the lamprey (Lampetra fluviatilis). J Hirnforsch 35:71–78.
Wood MR, Cohen MJ. 1979. Synaptic regeneration in identified neurons of
the lamprey spinal cords. Science 206:344–347.
Xu GY, Hughes MG, Ye Z, Hulsebosch CE, McAdoo DJ. 2004. Concentrations
of glutamate released following spinal cord injury kill oligodendrocytes in the
spinal cord. Exp Neurol 187:329–336.
Yang Y, Li Q, Wang CX, Jeerakathil T, Shuaib A. 2000. Dose-dependent neu-
roprotection with tiagabine in a focal cerebral ischemia model in rat. Neuro-
report 11:2307–2311.
Yin HS, Selzer ME. 1983. Axonal regeneration in lamprey spinal cord. J Neu-
rosci 3:1135–1144.
Zafra F, Gimenez C. 2008. Glycine transporters and synaptic function. IUBMB
Life 60:810–817.
Zhang G, Pizarro IV, Swain GP, Kang SH, Selzer ME. 2014. Neurogenesis in
the lamprey CNS following spinal cord transection. J Comp Neurol
522:1316–1332.
Fernandez-Lopez et al.: Neurotransmitter Changes After Spinal Injury
August 2014 1269
