ar
Sensorimotor cord grey matter accessible for in vivo imaging. In a parallel approach, several research groups have applied
orimotor circuits in the isolated spinal cord (in vitro) to provide complementary
. . .
pinal ci
vivo .
. . .
o . .
pinal co
. . .
Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Experimental
j ourna l homepage: www.e lIntroduction
The vertebrate spinal cord harbors multiple types of neurons orga-
nized in many different functional circuits, which in turn are involved
in fundamental behaviors including sensation, reflexes and locomotion
(Garcia-Campmany et al., 2010; Schouenborg, 2008). These circuits
can be broadly defined according to developmental origins and with re-
spect to their specific functional role in particular behaviors. Single-cell
electrophysiological recordings have helped to characterize the physio-Abbreviations: ACSF, artificial cerebrospinal fluid; E
encephalitis; GFP, green fluorescent protein; OGB-1, O
sulforhodamine 101; ROI, region of interest.
⁎ Corresponding author. Fax: +41 44 6353303.
E-mail address: helmchen@hifo.uzh.ch (F. Helmchen
1 Present address: Department of Neuropharmacolo
and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Winterthurers
Switzerland.
0014-4886/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.07.014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . .
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
Two-photon imaging of sensorimotor s
Two-photon imaging of spinal cord in
Experimental challenges . . . .
Imaging structural dynamics in viv
Two-photon calcium imaging of s
Conclusions and outlook . . . . . .networks. In this review we summarize recent results from these types of high-resolution two-photon imag-
ing studies in the spinal cord and provide experimental perspectives for improving and extending this ap-
proach in future applications.
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
rcuits in vitro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
rd neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22information and valuable new perspectives on the function of specific interneuron types in locomotor-relatedDorsal horn two-photon imaging to sensTwo-photon
Calcium imaging
proteins. Other studies emp
sponses in individual neuroDepartment of Neurophysiology, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 1 April 2011
Revised 27 March 2012
Accepted 21 July 2012
Available online 28 July 2012
Keywords:
Spinal cord
Two-photon microscopy enables high-resolution in vivo imaging of cellular morphology and activity, in par-
ticular of population activity in complex neuronal circuits. While two-photon imaging has been extensively
used in a variety of brain regions in different species, in vivo application to the vertebrate spinal cord has
lagged behind and only recently became feasible by adapting and refining the experimental preparations.
A major experimental challenge for spinal cord imaging is adequate control of tissue movement, which
meanwhile can be achieved by various means. One set of studies monitored structural dynamics of neuronal
and glial cellular components in living animals using transgenic mice with specific expression of fluorescent
loyed in vivo calcium imaging for functional measurements of sensory-evoked re-
ns of the dorsal horn circuitry, which at present is the only part of rodent spinalReview
Two-photon imaging of spinal cord cellul
Helge C. Johannssen 1, Fritjof Helmchen ⁎AE, experimental autoimmune
regon Green Bapta-1; SR101,
).
gy, Institute of Pharmacology
trasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich,
rights reserved.networks
Neurology
sev ie r .com/ locate /yexnrlogical properties of various spinal cord cell types, e.g. in the dorsal horn,
both in vitro (Grudt and Perl, 2002; Lu and Perl, 2003, 2005;
Ruscheweyh et al., 2004; Todd et al., 2002; Yoshimura and Jessell,
1989) and in vivo (Bester et al., 2000; Dalal et al., 1999; Furue et al.,
1999; Graham et al., 2004a, 2004b; Light andWillcockson, 1999). How-
ever, this approach is usually limited to individual or very few cells and–
in the case of in vivo studies – suffers from the difficulties of targeting
19H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26and identifying particular neuronal cell types.Moreover, blind in vivo re-
cordings may be biased towards active network elements and thus pro-
vide a narrow if not skewed view on circuit dynamics. To obtain a more
comprehensive view on spinal cord circuits, imaging techniques are of
great value as they can directly visualize various structural and function-
al aspects. In particular, two-photon microscopy provides sub-cellular
resolution in intact neural tissue and can reveal activity patterns in
local neuronal populations (for reviews see Garaschuk et al., 2006;
Helmchen and Denk, 2005; Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Kerr and
Denk, 2008),making it a promising technique to reveal the cellular com-
position and dynamic interplay within spinal cord circuits in a descrip-
tive, non-biased manner.
Two-photon imaging has been widely applied in various animal
models and brain regions, either to study structural dynamics of den-
drites, axons, and glial processes, or to reveal functional activity pat-
terns in local neuronal populations. For example, in the rodent
neocortex the turn-over of dendritic spines and axonal boutons and
their structural rearrangements have been characterized by repeated
imaging over long time periods, up to several months (Bhatt et al.,
2009; Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009). In addition, two-photon calcium
imaging has enabled simultaneous monitoring of functional signals in
tens to hundreds of cells in various cortical areas (reviewed in
Garaschuk et al., 2006; Grewe and Helmchen, 2009). Both types of im-
aging studies, investigating either structural dynamics or cellular activ-
ities, have also been applied to various animal models of brain diseases
in order to characterize pathological alterations (e.g., Brown et al., 2010;
Busche et al., 2008; Fuhrmann et al., 2010; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005). In
recent years, two-photonmicroscopy in addition has seen an expansion
in available scanning modes (Cheng et al., 2011; Göbel and Helmchen,
2007), improvements in speed (Grewe et al., 2010; Katona et al.,
2012), and growing application of genetically-encoded indicators
(Lütcke et al., 2010; Tian et al., 2009), all advances that should further
extend the possibilities for studying neural circuits.
For spinal cord studies, two-photon imaging has been lately
employed both in vitro and in vivo. Spinal cord circuits comprise various
neuronal subpopulations that are often interconnected in a complex,
translaminar fashion. In vitropreparations used for two-photon imaging
include acute slices (Wilson et al., 2007a, 2007b) and in particular
whole spinal cords isolated from neonatal mouse (Diaz-Rios et al.,
2007; Kwan et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2010; Zhong et al., 2010). In the
latter case, neuronal network activity was monitored following electri-
cal stimulation of afferents (O'Donovan et al., 2005) or during
drug-induced fictive locomotion paradigms (Kwan et al., 2009; Wilson
et al., 2007a, 2007b, 2010; Zhong et al., 2010). Moreover, two-photon
calcium imaging was applied to in vitro preparations from transgenic
mice with specific fluorescent protein expression to investigate the
role of genetically defined spinal neuronal populations (Kwan et al.,
2009; Wilson et al., 2007a, 2007b, 2010; Zhong et al., 2010).
High-resolution imaging in the spinal cord in vivo ismore challenging
compared to the brain because it faces special problems such as difficult
surgical access and pronounced tissuemovement artifacts. In addition, in
adult animals typically used for these experiments, suboptimal optical
conditions prevail due to high levels of myelination. Most two-photon
imaging studies performed in the spinal cord of living rodents so far
have focused on superficial dorsal white matter tracts, making use of
sparsely labeled axons and the expression of fluorescent reporter pro-
teins in different glial cell populations (Davalos et al., 2008; Dibaj et al.,
2010a, 2010b; Dray et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012;
Ylera et al., 2009). Especially in the field of imaging glial networks and
their interactions with defined neuronal circuits, transgenic animals
have proven highly beneficial to elucidate mechanism of structural plas-
ticity. Because the superficial area of the spinal cord is often affected dur-
ing severe human pathologies including traumatic injury and multiple
sclerosis, imaging the concomitant structural plasticity of axonal fibers
or glial cells in the respective animalmodels of such pathologiesmay en-
able a more detailed understanding of disease-related mechanisms.Finally, further challenges exist for establishing functional two-
photon imaging of mammalian spinal cord neuronal networks in vivo.
Neuronal populations residing in the central grey matter are even more
difficult to access optically than white matter cells. Specifically, the pres-
ence of superficially locatedmyelinatedfiber bundles hinders deep imag-
ing. In addition, a high level of mechanical stability is paramount to
resolve functional signals such as rapid calcium transients on a fast time
scale. Only recently, using special approaches to achieve sufficient stabil-
ity levels, fast calcium transients in mouse spinal cord neuronal
populations were resolved (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010; Laffray et
al., 2011). In the following we first provide an overview of two-photon
imaging in spinal cord in vitro preparations beforewe describe the recent
progress in high-resolution imaging of spinal cord dorsal horn in living
animals.
Two-photon imaging of sensorimotor spinal circuits in vitro
To investigate principles of motor and pre-motor neuronal circuit
function with two-photon imaging, several groups recently used cal-
cium imaging in spinal cord preparations from early postnatal mice in
vitro (Kwan et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2007a, 2007b, 2010; Zhong et
al., 2010). The isolated spinal cord of neonatal mice can be superfused
with oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) and kept in
healthy condition for more than 10 h (Fig. 1A). At this early age, op-
tical access can be gained to deeper spinal cord laminae due to the
lack of full myelination and the overall smaller dimensions of the neo-
natal spinal cord. In addition, the preparation can be arbitrarily placed
to optimize access to either the dorsal or the ventral side. Calcium in-
dicator delivery was accomplished either by retrograde labeling
(O'Donovan et al., 2005), bulk loading with small molecule AM-ester
dyes (Kwan et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2007a, 2007b, 2010; Zhong et al.,
2010) (Fig. 1B), or electroporation techniques (Bonnot et al., 2005).
These experimental advantages come, however, with some limitations.
First, the isolated spinal cord preparation is restricted to the first few
postnatal days in mice, thus reflecting a developing system, which has
to be considered for appropriate data interpretation. Second, the
connectivity to other CNS areas, in particular the brainstem, which is
known to modulate sensorimotor integration, is generally truncated,
although it can be preserved using variants of the standard preparation
protocol (Gordon and Whelan, 2008). Modulatory in vivo effects can
be, however,mimicked to a certain degree, e.g., by using neurotransmit-
ters or electrical activation of the dorsal roots still attached to the
preparation.
A widely used experimental paradigm to study locomotor circuits in
the isolated spinal cord is a condition of rhythmic activity termed “fictive
locomotion”, which can be induced by bath application of a
neuromodulatory cocktail (Cazalets et al., 1992; Kudo and Yamada,
1987). Combining calcium imaging techniques with suitable transgenic
reporter lines, several groups lately investigated the activity patterns of
discrete neuronal populations in the neonatal mouse spinal cord during
fictive locomotion (Kwan et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2007a, 2007b, 2010;
Zhong et al., 2010). Since the summed output of the spinal cord locomo-
tor circuit can be simultaneously recorded from the ventral roots (see
Fig. 1A), the functional role of different neuron types in network activity
could be assessed. Two-photon calcium imagingwas for example used in
acute slices and the whole spinal cord preparation of HB9:eGFP mice to
monitor the extent of synchronous bursting activity and electrotonic
coupling in the subpopulation of HB9 interneurons (Wilson et al.,
2007a, 2007b). In another imaging study of spinal locomotor networks,
two-photon imaging of HB9 interneuron activity patterns during fictive
locomotion revealed spatio-temporal relationships of HB9-activities
with respect to the locomotor network (Kwan et al., 2009). Other neuro-
nal populations residing in more central laminae have been accessed by
hemisecting the spinal cord (Wilson et al., 2010). In this study,
two-photon imaging of dorsomedial GABAergic neurons in hemisected
spinal cords from Gad65-GFP mice showed that these cells are
al c
ygen
20 H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26Fig. 1. High-resolution two-photon imaging of rodent spinal cord. (A) Preparations for spin
pups, the preparation is placed in a perfusion chamber and continuously perfused with oxrhythmically active during fictive locomotion and are likely to provide
inhibitory drive towards motoneuron output. Similarly, two-photon cal-
cium imagingwas used in Chx10::CFPmouse spinal cords to visualize ac-
tivation of V2a interneurons during ipsi- and contralateral episodes of
ventral root output during fictive locomotion (Zhong et al., 2010).
Kwan et al. recently introduced coherence analysis as a tool to analyze
specifically large sets of cellular fluorescence traces with respect to
rhythmic locomotor output (Kwan et al., 2010). Calculation of the coher-
ence between cellular signal traces and the system's summed output
provides information about amplitude and phase of individual neuronal
activities relative to network activity. This approach seems to be a useful
addition to other approaches used in population data analysis (like spike
train reconstruction or principal component analysis, reviewed in Lütcke
andHelmchen, 2011), especiallywhen imaging data is acquired in paral-
lel with a measure of more global network state (e.g. locomotor output,
EEG recording). Taken together, two-photon imaging studies in the neo-
natal spinal cord have provided important insights into the functional
role of genetically defined spinal cord subpopulations. The in vitro ap-
proaches thus are well suited to determine the intrinsic contributions
of different cell classes towards shaping sensorimotor output on a circuit
level.
Two-photon imaging of spinal cord in vivo
Experimental challenges
High-resolution optical imaging of neuronal and glial networks in
living rodents requiresminimization of translational tissuemovements,
stimulate spinal circuits via the ventral and/or dorsal roots. Right: For imaging in living animal
nective tissue. Typically, the osseous vertebral lamina is removed by laminectomy. For bulk
two-photon image of a neuronal population in the intermediate zone of a hemisected neonatal
circuits after OGB-1 loading.Motor neuronswere in addition retrogradely labeled by intramuscu
neurite extensions can be resolved in many cases. (C) In vivo two-photon image examples. Lef
cells (green; 30-μm z-projection). Prior to image acquisition, the blood plasma of Cx3CR1-GFP
(green) and adjacent microglia cells (pseudo-colored in blue) imaged in the spinal cord dors
glycinergic neurons imaged in the superficial dorsal horn of GlyT2-EGFP mice in vivo. (E) Serie
wild-type mice (left). Afferent fiber tracts entering the lateral grey matter at superficial levels
in the substantia gelatinosa can be well resolved (right).ord imaging. Left: Following isolation of the whole spinal cord from neonatal mouse or rat
ated ACSF. Small pins stabilized the isolated cord. Glass pipettes can be used to record orin particular drifts of the focal plane. Tissue movements originate from
the pulsations associatedwith heart beat and breathing. Inmost studies
on neocortex or subcortical regions such as the hippocampus, tissue sta-
bilization is achieved by either reducing invasiveness (preparation of a
small craniotomy or a thinned skull preparation, e.g. Davalos et al.,
2005; Drew et al., 2010; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005) or by mechanically
dampening tissue pulsations with cover glass slides in combination
with agar (Stosiek et al., 2003) or more specialized indention materials
(Dombeck et al., 2007). With such approaches, the remaining tissue
pulsations, which in the cortex are not influenced to large extents by
breathing movements, can be well controlled allowing even fine-scale
imaging of subcellular structures like dendritic spines (Bhatt et al.,
2009; Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009) and microglial filopodia (Davalos
et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005). The degree of stability can be
high enough to even permit functional imaging in awake, behaving an-
imals (Dombeck et al., 2007).
Given the spinal cord's inherent mechanical flexibility and the
level of invasiveness that is often required for optical access during
the experiment, achieving sufficient stability of the preparation is
particularly important for spinal cord imaging. Typically, spinal cord
movement is first of all minimized by fixating the vertebral column
with metal clamps. For mice, the optimal age for clamp fixation ap-
pears to be >6–8 weeks, which ensures sufficient rigidity of the ver-
tebral column. Relatively stable conditions can be achieved by
optimizing the animals' posture, as has been demonstrated in various
single-cell patch-clamp recording studies probing dorsal horn cells in
rats (Bester et al., 2000; Dalal et al., 1999; Furue et al., 1999; Light and
Willcockson, 1999) and mice (Graham et al., 2004a, 2004b), as well as
s surgical and optical access to the spinal cord requires resection of multiple layers of con-
loading of calcium indicators, the dura mater is incised or deflected. (B) Left: Example
spinal cord bulk loadedwith OGB-1AM. Right: Staining pattern in ventral horn locomotor
lar injection of Rhodamine Dextran one day before the imaging session. Note that primary
t: Two-photon image of the spinal microvasculature (red) in close contact with microglial
mice was stained by tail vein injection of a red fluorescent dextran. Right: Sensory axons
al white matter of Thy1-YFP/Cx3CR1-GFP double transgenic mice. (D) Side projection of
s of two-photon images of OGB-1-labeled neuronal networks in the dorsal spinal cord of
are partly stained. Despite the occluding effects of these fiber tracts, individual neurons
21H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26in recent imaging studies (Davalos et al., 2008; Dibaj et al., 2010a,
2010b; Drdla et al., 2009; Ikeda et al., 2006; Johannssen and
Helmchen, 2010). Spontaneous breathing has a major effect on spinal
cord movements in intact rodents and its impact appears to be larger
in rats when compared to age-matched mice. To mechanically isolate
the spinal cord from breathing related movements, the fixated animal
can be slightly elevated from the heating pad (Davalos and
Akassoglou, 2012; Davalos et al., 2008) although great care has to
be taken to avoid hypothermia in this case, especially in mice. Period-
ic clearance of accumulated mucus is advisable to maintain stable
breathing over time (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010) and the anes-
thesia regime used can affect recording stability as well (Davalos
et al., 2008).
A further method for stabilization is artificial ventilation, which
does not seem to be absolutely required but helps to stabilize spinal
cord in vivo preparations in several ways (Dibaj et al., 2010a, 2010b;
Ikeda et al., 2006; Kerschensteiner et al., 2005). Within their physio-
logical range, ventilation frequency and inhalation volume can be ad-
justed to minimize their influence on spinal cord movement. There
are several ways to implement artificial ventilation in mice and rats
such as endotracheal intubation techniques and intubation after tra-
cheotomy, which are usually combined with paralyzing agents mak-
ing anesthesia surveillance by reflex assessment challenging
(alternative methods to monitor anesthesia levels in this case could
be recording of the electrocardiogram, ECG, and/or electroencephalo-
gram, EEG, previously calibrated to the actual anesthetic regime used;
see for example (Dibaj et al., 2010a)). Although less invasive when
compared to the tracheotomy approach, endotracheal intubation is
more difficult to master in mice due to smaller upper airway dimen-
sions. When relatively slow events are monitored, data acquisition
can be triggered to the artificial breathing cycle when using artificial
ventilation. Similarly triggering on the cardiac cycle can help to cir-
cumvent heart-beat induced movement artifacts.
Optical imaging of the spinal cord in vivo obviously involves surgical
procedures that enable direct tissue access (Fig. 1A). The extent and
complexity of the surgery, however, largely depend on the specific ex-
perimental questions. If target structures are pre-labeled, e.g., by
expression of fluorescent marker proteins in subsets of neurons
(Zeilhofer et al., 2005) or glial cells (Jung et al., 2000), the dura does
not need to be removed but only cleared from connective tissue to
allow high-resolution imaging (Dibaj et al., 2010a). For optical access
to the dorsal spinal cord surface, the intervertebral space can be
exploited without microsurgical removal of one or more vertebrae
(Kim et al., 2010). While this minimally invasive approach is limited
to a rather restricted area, it is especially well suited for repeated imag-
ing over days, in part because the necessary post-operative care regime
does not have to deal with a major surgery as in the case of a
laminectomy. On the other hand, if imaging is performed repeatedly
after conducting a laminectomy, adequate analgesic management is re-
quired and the surgery site needs to be protected between imaging ses-
sions by means of an artificial dura substitute (Kerschensteiner et al.,
2005) or a protective agar pad (Dray et al., 2009). Only recently,
time-lapse imaging of axons, glia and immune cells in the living
mouse spinal cord was reported by using chronically implanted imag-
ing chambers (Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012). In these studies,
implanted animals could be re-anesthetized for each imaging session
without the need of repeated surgery. So far, most spinal cord in vivo
imaging studies in intact rodents focused on medially located, superfi-
cial whitematter tracts to visualize their structural plasticity or interac-
tionwith glial cells (Davalos et al., 2008; Dibaj et al., 2010a, 2010b; Dray
et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012; Kerschensteiner et
al., 2005; Ylera et al., 2009). In contrast, for two-photon calcium imaging
of dorsal horn neurons, the grey matter comprising neuronal circuits of
interest needs to be accessed. By slightly rotating the animal, direct, lat-
eral access to the superficial laminae of the lumbar dorsal horn is facil-
itated (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010). To maximize imaging depth,it is beneficial to avoidmyelinated structures like prominent fiber tracts
as far as possible because these efficiently absorb and scatter the excita-
tion light, severely decreasing resolution and contrast. In combination
with bulk loading of the calcium indicator OGB-1AM, activity of neuro-
nal populations located in Laminae I and II in the spinal cord of adult
mice could be monitored in vivo (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010).
Since other factors including signal-to-noise ratio and the degree of
neuropil staining of a given dye also influence imaging depth (Göbel
and Helmchen, 2007), bright labeling of relatively few structures
might be especially suited to gain access to evendeeper spinal cord lam-
inae in vivo (see Fig. 1D for example).
Imaging structural dynamics in vivo
Given the spinal cord's cellular diversity, techniques for specific la-
beling of neuronal subpopulations are indispensable to investigate
specific spinal cord circuits. Classical anatomical approaches like trac-
ing techniques to identify neuronal populations based on target in-
nervation have been used both in vitro (O'Donovan et al., 2005) and
in vivo (Ikeda et al., 2006). Fluorescent tracers like DiI or dextrans
can then also be combined with bulk loading of AM-type calcium in-
dicators during the imaging experiment, for example to retrogradely
identify Lamina I projection neurons in vivo (Ikeda et al., 2006) (see
also Fig. 3B) or motoneurons in vitro (Fig. 1B).
A particularly valuable and surgically non-invasive way to identify
specific subtypes of spinal cord neurons is transgenic expression of
fluorescent proteins (see examples in Figs. 1C and D). Depending on
several factors, including expression levels and sparseness of labeling,
genetically encoded markers provide good contrast and importantly,
allow repeated imaging (Dray et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012;
Fenrich et al., 2012; Kerschensteiner et al., 2005). However, many
current promoters used to drive fluorescent protein expression result
in labeling of large neuronal populations, which share a certain trans-
mitter system or receptor type. Transgenic mice expressing fluores-
cent proteins only in subsets of spinal cord neurons could be an
increasingly valuable tool to investigate spinal circuits on a finer
scale (Belle et al., 2007; Heinke et al., 2004; Torsney et al., 2006).
Several recent studies imaging spinal cord neurons in vivo used
Thy1-GFP transgenic mice for acute and repeated imaging of single
axons (Dray et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012;
Kerschensteiner et al., 2005; Ylera et al., 2009). Sparse expression of
fluorescent reporter proteins in spinal cord projection neurons en-
abled faithful monitoring of individual regenerating axons with high
resolution after experimental spinal cord injury (Dray et al., 2009;
Fenrich et al., 2012; Kerschensteiner et al., 2005; Ylera et al., 2009).
From a technical perspective, these structural changes are relatively
slow, typically occurring on the minutes to hours time scale, and
therefore allow offline correction of lateral movements and focal
plane shifts, given that they do not exceed the dimensions of image
stacks acquired over time. After spinal cord injury, central sensory
axon regeneration capacity depends on the timing of peripheral
nerve injuries, which was recently observed with in vivo two-photon
imaging of fibers growing through an acute lesion site (Ylera et al.,
2009). In a related study using the lamprey spinal cord model of axo-
nal regeneration, two photon imaging was used to assess the overall
growth-promoting effect of cAMP after spinal cord injury in vivo,
highlighting its differential role of inhibiting the early phase of retrac-
tion and increasing the later outgrowth speed (Jin et al., 2009).
Following a localmechanical dorsal column lesion, Dray et al. (2009)
monitored the parallel dynamics of regenerating, GFP-positive sensory
axon populations and the local microvasculature repeatedly for up to
4 months. Blood vessels in this case were stained by i.v. administration
of Rhodamine dextran (see also Fig. 1C). Long-term imaging revealed an
early phase of enhanced vessel growth during a longer lasting period of
axonal regrowth past the lesion site. In this case, the laminectomy site
could be sufficiently protected in between trials by agar cushioning,
22 H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26making repeated surgery necessary but also allowing periodic cleaning
of the imaging site to optimize optical access. Two groups recently
employed custom-made, implanted imaging chambers for chronic spi-
nal cord imaging in transgenic mice (Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al.,
2012). Farrar et al. (2012) repeatedly imaged microglia dynamics asso-
ciated with axonal injury and regeneration. With this approach, the au-
thors visualized and quantified the time course of microglia activation
after focal laser injury on a daily basis and also observed differential ax-
onal plasticity over several weeks. Importantly, it now became possible
to repeatedly image the spinal cord without additional surgery (Farrar
et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012). However, great care is necessary to
avoid deterioration of the imaging window over time due to inflamma-
tion or tissue regrowth. Taken together, these chronic imaging ap-
proaches open new avenues towards examining the long-term
regeneration of axons during spinal cord pathologies as well as their in-
teraction with other tissue compartments with high resolution in vivo.
Spinal cord glial cell populations, in addition to their established
roles in neurotrophic support, electrical insulation and immunologi-
cal surveillance (Hanisch and Kettenmann, 2007; Nave, 2010), have
emerged as important players in influencing neuronal activity
patterns by release of various modulatory factors (Bardoni et al.,
2010; Coull et al., 2005). In certain pathological settings, e.g. after
spinal cord injury, astrocytes are known to undergo reactive gliosis
impeding the regeneration of injured axons (Silver and Miller,
2004). For imaging astrocyte signaling under various experimental
conditions, it would be desirable to identify this cell population
with a rather simple staining technique. In the neocortex, brief appli-
cation of sulforhodamine 101 (SR101) to the brain surface is such a
method, selectively staining astrocytes in vivo (Nimmerjahn et al.,
2004). In the spinal cord, however, SR101 application resulted in
more complex staining patterns (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010).
Although topical application of SR101 to the dorsal surface in vivo
resulted in preferential astroglial dye uptake, control experiments
using the fixable analogue Texas Red hydrazide (TRH) or tissue injec-
tion of SR101 caused labeling of neuronal cells as well (Johannssen
and Helmchen, 2010). In vitro, bath application of SR101 has been
reported to label spinal cord neurons in isolated, neonatal prepara-
tions in an activity-dependent manner (Kjaerulff et al., 1994;
Lavallee and Pflieger, 2009). This rather wide range of SR101 uptake
in the spinal cord could be due to several factors including the type
of preparation used, the mode, duration and concentration of dye
application and the animals' age. As an alternative, selective genetic
labeling techniques can be exploited to study morphological interac-
tions of spinal cord astrocytes with neurons, for example in models
of spinal cord edema (Dibaj et al., 2007), which frequently occurs
after spinal cord injury.
Recent imaging studies of microglia dynamics in the neocortex
shed new light on the role of these cells in constant and active sur-
veillance of the surrounding brain tissue and also demonstrated
purinergic signaling as a key chemoattractant pathway for microglia
migration (Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005). These stud-
ies used a Cx3CR1-GFP mouse line, in which microglia express GFP
(Jung et al., 2000). Mechanisms of how microglia interact with neu-
rons during regeneration after injury and during plasticity of pain
networks are a field of major interest in current spinal cord research
(Coull et al., 2005; Dibaj et al., 2010a; Farrar et al., 2012). In the spinal
cord, microglial cells have been shown to tune neuronal firing in spi-
nal pain-processing circuits by release of BDNF (Coull et al., 2005).
Specifically, ATP-dependent signaling mechanisms have been identi-
fied (Tsuda et al., 2010), which are especially important in spinal
cord injury paradigms and in models of neuropathic pain (Coull et
al., 2005). Recently, in vivo time lapse imaging in double-transgenic
Cx3CR1/Thy1-mice was used to visualize the structural dynamics of
microglia in spinal white matter before and after focal laser injury
(Dibaj et al., 2010a) as well as in acute post-mortem tissue (Dibaj et
al., 2010b) (see also Fig. 1C). After injury, microglia showed increasedrates of directional motility towards the lesion site, which – in addi-
tion to ATP – depended on NO signaling (Dibaj et al., 2010a), which
had been previously shown to influence microglia migration behavior
in the leech nerve cord (Duan et al., 2003). These signaling pathways
are likely to be critically involved in the enhanced activation and re-
cruitment of macrophages during pathological conditions like spinal
cord injury (Schnell et al., 1999), multiple sclerosis (Monif et al.,
2010) and chronic pain (Tsuda et al., 2010). Using new methodolog-
ical improvements, especially in repeated spinal cord imaging tech-
niques (Dray et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012;
Kerschensteiner et al., 2005), mechanistic details of microglia plastic-
ity can now be further explored in vivo in the context of various ex-
perimental settings.
In addition to the roles of microglia in spinal cord trauma and
chronic pain states, in vivo imaging approaches can be used to
visualize interactions of monocytic immune cells with the spinal
cord white matter and vasculature in the context of experimental
autoinflammatory encephalitis (EAE), which is an animal model of
human multiple sclerosis. In vivo imaging of pre-labeled T cells di-
rectly revealed mechanistic details about their interaction with the
spinal cord blood brain barrier in EAE mice (Vajkoczy et al., 2001).
In the same disease model, two-photon imaging of Cx1CR3-positive
microglia or CxCR6-positive immune cells expressing GFP was used
to observe the directional migration of CxCR6-cells within the dorsal
white matter in vivo (Kim et al., 2010). In summary, high resolution
in vivo imaging of neuronal and glial structural plasticity in the intact
spinal cord recently provided detailed insights into mechanisms of
disease and regeneration.
Two-photon calcium imaging of spinal cord neurons
Functional imaging of cellular activity in the intact spinal cord ob-
viously would be of great value to complement the studies on struc-
tural changes. At least for the superficial dorsal horn, progress has
been made recently to establish two-photon calcium imaging of
grey matter neurons and glial cells, complementing earlier in vivo
electrical recordings of spinal cord neurons. The main method that
has been used so far for calcium indicator labeling in spinal cord
is bulk loading by injection of a calcium indicator in its AM-ester
form (Brustein et al., 2003; Drdla et al., 2009; Ikeda et al., 2006;
Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010), similar to previous studies in vari-
ous brain areas (Kerr et al., 2005; Schultz et al., 2009; Stosiek et al.,
2003; Sullivan et al., 2005). Injection of the indicator typically results
in a quick, functional labeling of neuronal and glial populations cover-
ing an area of several hundred microns (Fig. 1E). Although brightness
of staining typically broadly segregates neuronal and glial cells
(Stosiek et al., 2003), labeling of cellular structures is virtually
non-selective and also accompanied by a relatively high background
due to neuropil staining raising the possibility of signal contamina-
tion (Göbel and Helmchen, 2007; Kerr and Denk, 2008). In principle,
various other techniques for calcium indicator labeling could also be
applied to the spinal cord, such as intracellular loading of individual
cells or local electroporation of salt- or dextran-forms of small mole-
cule indicators, which can stain individual or groups of dozens of cells
with high signal-to-background ratio (Nagayama et al., 2007; Nevian
and Helmchen, 2007). In the isolated neonatal spinal cord bulk elec-
troporation has been shown to efficiently label cellular networks, al-
beit with unclear cell type-specificity (Bonnot et al., 2009). The
feasibility and the degree of specificity of these methods yet remain
to be determined for the intact, adult spinal cord.
In the first study using in vivo bolus loading of calcium indicator
and high-resolution two-photon calcium imaging of spinal cord neu-
ronal populations, zebrafish larvae were used to monitor responses to
sensory stimulation and drug application (Brustein et al., 2003)
(Fig. 2A). Zebrafish larvae have great genetic potential and are highly
transparent and thus advantageous for optical techniques, as previously
rgan
f dif
im
ecti
The
inch
ite c
trian
ved
y of
Pane
23H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26exploited for confocal in vivo imaging of the embryonic ventral spinal
cord with genetically encoded calcium indicators (Higashijima et al.,
2003; Warp et al., 2012). It remains yet to be determined how exactly
Fig. 2. In vivo two-photon calcium imaging in the spinal cord of three different model o
and fluorescence changes in individual cells were imaged during sensory stimulation o
neurons of zebrafish larvae. Left, schematic of the stimulation paradigm and two-photon
transients in the five marked cells. (B) Left, Lamina I projection neuron identified by inj
changes in OGB-1 fluorescence within PAG-projecting Lamina I neurons (n=7) in rats.
nerve at C-fiber intensity in vivo and persists throughout the stimulation period. (C) P
showing OGB-1 loaded neuronal populations in the mouse superficial dorsal horn. Wh
right. Repeated mechanical stimulation induced time-locked calcium transients (red
detected as well. (D) Left, expanded view of the pinch-evoked calcium transients obser
in this cell and variations of signal magnitude during repeated stimulation. Right, overla
the red curve is the exponential fit used to approximate signal decay.
Panel A adapted from Brustein et al. (2003). Panel B adapted from Ikeda et al. (2006).findings from developing zebrafish spinal circuits relate to experiments
in adult rodents, which are frequently used as model systems to inves-
tigate mechanisms of sensory processing and pain. In recent pioneering
experiments in spinal cord of young rats, in vivo calcium imaging was
performed after bulk loading of OGB-1, involving extensive adaptations
to stabilize the preparation including artificial ventilation, cardiac trig-
gering of data acquisition and cardio-pulmonary bypass techniques
(Drdla et al., 2009; Ikeda et al., 2006). Using these procedures, Ikeda
et al. (2006) could image sciatic nerve stimulation-induced calcium
gradients in several classes of Lamina I neurons in vivo (Fig. 2B).
Similarly, in another publication from the same group, calcium
gradients were observed after opioid application in vivo in rats
(Drdla et al., 2009). The strengths of this approach are clearly the
established and well-defined functional anatomy of the somatosen-
sory system and its behavioral correlates in the rat as a model organ-
ism. However, in contrast to the zebrafish study of sensory-evoked
activity (Brustein et al., 2003), elementary calcium transients, trig-
gered by a single or a few action potentials, could not be resolved
in these two studies, possibly because spinal cord movement is
more difficult to control in rats when compared to smaller model
organisms.
To resolve individual calcium transients in dorsal horn neurons in
living rats and mice, spinal cord movements need to be further re-
duced down to the microscopic level. While electrical recording con-
figurations seem to tolerate certain amounts of movement relative to
the pipette (after seal formation), high-resolution calcium measure-
ments are highly sensitive to drifts of only a few microns occurring
in the z-direction (Kerr and Denk, 2008). While lateral shifts within
a single focal plane can be corrected offline, such correction is usually
difficult or impossible for focus shifts (Greenberg et al., 2008). It is
therefore paramount to improve the preparation stability as much
as possible in order to optimize the raw data quality. Recently, wedemonstrated in vivo calcium imaging of dorsal horn neurons in
mice (Johannssen and Helmchen, 2010) (Figs. 2C, D). In this study
we effectively dampened tissue pulsations that remained after pos-
isms. In all cases neuronal circuits were bulk-loaded with AM-type calcium indicators
ferent modalities. (A) Mechanical stimulation evokes calcium transients in spinal cord
age of spinal cord populations loaded with Fura PE3 AM. Right, sensory-evoked calcium
on of the tracer DiI into the periaqueductal grey (PAG) prior to imaging. Right, average
calcium elevation is evoked by low-frequency electrical stimulation (LFS) of the sciatic
-evoked calcium transients in subsets of dorsal horn cells in vivo. Two-photon image
ircles indicate ROIs for which the corresponding fluorescence traces are shown on the
gles) in a subset of cells and intermittent spontaneous events (blue asterisks) were
in cell 1 (uppermost trace in panel C) illustrating precise time-locking of the responses
the sensory-triggered calcium transients. The dashed line marks pinch stimulation and
ls C and D adapted from Johannssen and Helmchen (2010).ture optimization with simple mechanical means by covering the
laminectomy with a sheet of agarose and a coverglass (Fig. 3A).
With this method, sensory-evoked elementary calcium transients
could be resolved in single cells within the mouse superficial dorsal
horn (Figs. 2C, D). Importantly, the dampening material can be tem-
porarily removed if required, e.g. for the local application of drugs, ei-
ther topical or by intraspinal injection.
An alternative method could be to compensate focal shifts by on-
line corrective movements of the microscope objective, as demon-
strated recently (Laffray et al., 2011). Furthermore, remaining minor
motions can be dealt with by using ratiometric imaging. In principle,
this can be either achieved with ratiometric indicator dyes or by
co-injection of OGB-1 and a red fluorescent marker such as Calcein
red/orange AM, which itself does not exhibit activity-dependent fluo-
rescence intensity changes (Fig. 3B). The cellular signal is in this case
evaluated as the ratio of the fluorescence intensities in the green
(OGB-1) and the red channel (Calcein), respectively. This ratio is
much less sensitive to tissue shifts so that the calcium transients
can be extracted even under noisy conditions (Fig. 3B). Ratiometric
imaging thus might be especially well suited for functional imaging
studies in the intact spinal cord.
Conclusions and outlook
In summary, two-photon imaging in the spinal cord is now ap-
plied using both in vitro and in vivo preparations. For in vivo imaging,
key methodological advances have been made that now enable
high-resolution studies of both spinal cord structure and function.
In particular, functional imaging of neuronal calcium transients in
the intact spinal cord has just emerged. This approach can be
expected to find extended applications in the future as it opens new
opportunities to study circuit activity with cellular resolution. The
24 H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26main limitation of in vivo calcium imaging experiments currently is
the restriction to the superficial dorsal horn due to heavy myelination
precluding optical access to deeper laminae. Even if optical conditions
in terms of light scattering and absorption could be improved, e.g. by
using substantially longer excitation wavelengths (Kobat et al., 2009),
two-photon microscopy cannot be expected to yield a maximal depth
penetration beyond 1 mm (Helmchen and Denk, 2005). Thus, imag-
ing of deeper layers and especially ventral laminae in vivowould nec-
essarily involve more invasive approaches, for example the use of
fiber optics and microlenses for fluorescence excitation and collec-
tion. The feasibility of directly accessing the spinal cord of living rats
with a commercially available microlens system was recently demon-
strated (Wang et al., 2007). Similarly, fiber- or microlens-based min-
iature microscopes (Engelbrecht et al., 2008; Flusberg et al., 2005;
Göbel et al., 2004) might be inserted deeper into spinal tissue. How-
ever, since spinal sensorimotor circuits are heavily interconnected
across laminae and rely on feedback inputs for proper functioning,
such approaches would require careful interpretation.
Fig. 3. Stabilization of spinal cord fluorescence signals using mechanical or ratiometric approa
reduces the extent of noisy fluorescence fluctuations during calcium imaging in the mouse do
before (top) and after (bottom) stabilization. (B) Alternatively ratiometric imaging can be
co-injected in the dorsal spinal cord together with the non-functional dye CellTrace calcein re
are shown for example cells in two different ways (two trials are shown for cell 1). Relative
many movement-induced artifacts superpositioned on the calcium signals. When the same ca
dye channels (ΔR/R), signals appear much cleaner.
Panel A modified from Johannssen and Helmchen (2010).A most promising future direction is the combination of
two-photon microscopy with genetically encoded calcium indicators
(Mank and Griesbeck, 2008; Miyawaki, 2003). Over the last decade,
the performance of GECIs has been improved substantially, e.g. with
respect to dynamic range, sensitivity, and kinetics, so that they now
are a key tool to study network function in vivo (Dombeck et al.,
2010; Lütcke et al., 2010; Mank et al., 2008; Tian et al., 2009). GECIs
can be expressed in the cells of interest using various methods, in-
cluding generation of transgenic animals (Hasan et al., 2004) and in
particular viral delivery (Lütcke et al., 2010; Tian et al., 2009). The
twomajor classes of GECIs are single fluorescent proteins and tandem
fluorescent proteins, which are linked via a calcium-binding domain.
The latter type might be particularly interesting, since its functional
signals rely on changes in fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) efficiency, which is typically read out ratiometrically in two
spectral windows. In a recent study, action potential-induced calcium
signals were resolved in mouse neocortex using the FRET-based indi-
cator Yellow Cameleon 3.60 (YC3.60; Lütcke et al., 2010). The
ches. (A) Dampening tissue pulsations by a layer of agarose and a cover glass significantly
rsal horn. On the right several example traces from neurons filled with OBG-1 are shown
used, which is less sensitive to movement artifacts. In this example, OGB-1AM was
d-orange AM. The fluorescence changes induced by electrical afferent stimulation in vivo
percentage changes of OGB-1 fluorescence (ΔF/F from the green channel alone) contain
lcium signals are evaluated as relative percentage changes of the ratio between the two
Bester, H., Chapman, V., Besson, J.M., Bernard, J.F., 2000. Physiological properties of the
itoring of neuronal network activity in zebrafish by two-photon Ca(2+) imaging.
25H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26Pflugers Arch. 446, 766–773.
Busche, M.A., Eichhoff, G., Adelsberger, H., Abramowski, D., Wiederhold, K.H., Haass, C.,
Staufenbiel, M., Konnerth, A., Garaschuk, O., 2008. Clusters of hyperactive neurons
near amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Science 321,
1686–1689.
Cazalets, J.R., Sqalli-Houssaini, Y., Clarac, F., 1992. Activation of the central pattern gen-
erators for locomotion by serotonin and excitatory amino acids in neonatal rat. J.
Physiol. 455, 187–204.
Cheng, A., Goncalves, J.T., Golshani, P., Arisaka, K., Portera-Cailliau, C., 2011. Simulta-
neous two-photon calcium imaging at different depths with spatiotemporal
multiplexing. Nat. Methods 8, 139–142.
Coull, J.A., Beggs, S., Boudreau, D., Boivin, D., Tsuda, M., Inoue, K., Gravel, C., Salter,
M.W., De Koninck, Y., 2005. BDNF from microglia causes the shift in neuronal
anion gradient underlying neuropathic pain. Nature 438, 1017–1021.
Dalal, A., Tata, M., Allegre, G., Gekiere, F., Bons, N., Albe-Fessard, D., 1999. Spontaneous ac-
tivity of rat dorsal horn cells in spinal segments of sciatic projection following tran-
section of sciatic nerve or of corresponding dorsal roots. Neuroscience 94, 217–228.
Davalos, D., Akassoglou, K., 2012. In vivo imaging of the mouse spinal cord using two-
photon microscopy. J. Vis. Exp. (59), e2760 (2012 Jan 5).
Davalos, D., Grutzendler, J., Yang, G., Kim, J.V., Zuo, Y., Jung, S., Littman, D.R., Dustin,
M.L., Gan, W.B., 2005. ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury
in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 752–758.
Davalos, D., Lee, J.K., Smith, W.B., Brinkman, B., Ellisman, M.H., Zheng, B., Akassoglou, K.,
2008. Stable in vivo imaging of densely populated glia, axons and blood vessels inlamina I spinoparabrachial neurons in the rat. J. Neurophysiol. 83, 2239–2259.
Bhatt, D.H., Zhang, S., Gan, W.B., 2009. Dendritic spine dynamics. Annu. Rev. Physiol.
71, 261–282.
Bonnot, A., Mentis, G.Z., Skoch, J., O'Donovan, M.J., 2005. Electroporation loading of
calcium-sensitive dyes into the CNS. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 1793–1808.
Bonnot, A., Chub, N., Pujala, A., O'Donovan, M.J., 2009. Excitatory actions of ventral root
stimulation during network activity generated by the disinhibited neonatal mouse
spinal cord. J. Neurophysiol. 101, 2995–3011.
Brown, C.E., Boyd, J.D., Murphy, T.H., 2010. Longitudinal in vivo imaging reveals bal-
anced and branch-specific remodeling of mature cortical pyramidal dendritic ar-
bors after stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 783–791.
Brustein, E., Marandi, N., Kovalchuk, Y., Drapeau, P., Konnerth, A., 2003. “In vivo” mon-CFP-YFP FRET-pair in YC3.60 is linked by a calmodulin domain and a
M13 peptide, such that FRET efficiency changes as a function of calci-
um binding and protein conformation. Since the intact spinal cord is
particularly prone to instabilities, ratiometric indicators such as
YC3.60 could likely be advantageous in minimizing confounding mo-
tion artifacts in vivo.
By combining recent improvements of chronic preparations (Dray
et al., 2009; Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012; Kerschensteiner et
al., 2005) with the latest developments in the field of GECIs, even
long-term, repeated functional imaging might become feasible in
the intact spinal cord. In addition, inducible and targeted GECI ex-
pression could allow population-specific expression of these indica-
tors. Future cell-type specific functional imaging experiments thus
promise further insights into the dynamic interplay within complex
spinal circuits. To conclude, two-photon imaging has reached the spi-
nal cord and exciting developments are taking place towards address-
ing more detailed and sophisticated questions regarding fundamental
aspects of spinal cord physiology and pathology.
Acknowledgments
We thank D. Ladle for help with isolated spinal cord preparations
and retrograde tracings, H. U. Zeilhofer for providing GlyT2-eGFP
mice, E. Hochreutener for assistance with illustrations and M.
Thallmair for critical comments on the manuscript. This work was
supported by the NCCR “Neural Plasticity and Repair” and the EU
FP7 program (PLASTICISE, project number 223524).
References
Bardoni, R., Ghirri, A., Zonta, M., Betelli, C., Vitale, G., Ruggieri, V., Sandrini, M.,
Carmignoto, G., 2010. Glutamate-mediated astrocyte-to-neuron signalling in the
rat dorsal horn. J. Physiol. 588, 831–846.
Belle, M.D., Pattison, E.F., Cheunsuang, O., Stewart, A., Kramer, I., Sigrist, M., Arber, S.,
Morris, R., 2007. Characterization of a thy1.2 GFP transgenic mouse reveals a
tissue-specific organization of the spinal dorsal horn. Genesis 45, 679–688.the mouse spinal cord using two-photon microscopy. J. Neurosci. Methods 169, 1–7.Diaz-Rios, M., Dombeck, D.A., Webb, W.W., Harris-Warrick, R.M., 2007. Serotonin mod-
ulates dendritic calcium influx in commissural interneurons in the mouse spinal
locomotor network. J. Neurophysiol. 98, 2157–2167.
Dibaj, P., Kaiser, M., Hirrlinger, J., Kirchhoff, F., Neusch, C., 2007. Kir4.1 channels regu-
late swelling of astroglial processes in experimental spinal cord edema. J.
Neurochem. 103 (6), 2620–2628.
Dibaj, P., Nadrigny, F., Steffens, H., Scheller, A., Hirrlinger, J., Schomburg, E.D., Neusch,
C., Kirchhoff, F., 2010a. NO mediates microglial response to acute spinal cord injury
under ATP control in vivo. Glia 58, 1133–1144.
Dibaj, P., Steffens, H., Nadrigny, F., Neusch, C., Kirchhoff, F., Schomburg, E.D., 2010b.
Long-lasting post-mortem activity of spinal microglia in situ in mice. J. Neurosci.
Res. 88, 2431–2440.
Dombeck, D.A., Khabbaz, A.N., Collman, F., Adelman, T.L., Tank, D.W., 2007. Imaging
large-scale neural activity with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron
56, 43–57.
Dombeck, D.A., Harvey, C.D., Tian, L., Looger, L.L., Tank, D.W., 2010. Functional imaging
of hippocampal place cells at cellular resolution during virtual navigation. Nat.
Neurosci. 13, 1433–1440.
Dray, C., Rougon, G., Debarbieux, F., 2009. Quantitative analysis by in vivo imaging of
the dynamics of vascular and axonal networks in injured mouse spinal cord.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 9459–9464.
Drdla, R., Gassner, M., Gingl, E., Sandkuhler, J., 2009. Induction of synaptic long-term
potentiation after opioid withdrawal. Science 325, 207–210.
Drew, P.J., Shih, A.Y., Driscoll, J.D., Knutsen, P.M., Blinder, P., Davalos, D., Akassoglou, K.,
Tsai, P.S., Kleinfeld, D., 2010. Chronic optical access through a polished and
reinforced thinned skull. Nat. Methods 7, 981–984.
Duan, Y., Haugabook, S.J., Sahley, C.L., Muller, K.J., 2003. Methylene blue blocks cGMP
production and disrupts directed migration of microglia to nerve lesions in the
leech CNS. J. Neurobiol. 57, 183–192.
Engelbrecht, C.J., Johnston, R.S., Seibel, E.J., Helmchen, F., 2008. Ultra-compact fiber-
optic two-photon microscope for functional fluorescence imaging in vivo. Opt. Ex-
press 16, 5556–5564.
Farrar, M.J., Bernstein, I.M., Schlafer, D.H., Cleland, T.A., Fetcho, J.R., Schaffer, C.B., 2012.
Chronic in vivo imaging in the mouse spinal cord using an implanted chamber. Nat.
Methods 9, 297–302.
Fenrich, K.K., Weber, P., Hocine, M., Zalc, M., Rougon, G., Debarbieux, F., 2012. Long-
term in vivo imaging of normal and pathological mouse spinal cord with sub-
cellular resolution using implanted glass windows. J. Physiol. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1113/jphysiol.2012.230532 (Electronic publication ahead of print May 28,
2012).
Flusberg, B.A., Cocker, E.D., Piyawattanametha, W., Jung, J.C., Cheung, E.L., Schnitzer,
M.J., 2005. Fiber-optic fluorescence imaging. Nat. Methods 2, 941–950.
Fuhrmann, M., Bittner, T., Jung, C.K., Burgold, S., Page, R.M., Mitteregger, G., Haass, C.,
LaFerla, F.M., Kretzschmar, H., Herms, J., 2010. Microglial Cx3cr1 knockout pre-
vents neuron loss in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Neurosci. 13,
411–413.
Furue, H., Narikawa, K., Kumamoto, E., Yoshimura, M., 1999. Responsiveness of rat
substantia gelatinosa neurones to mechanical but not thermal stimuli revealed
by in vivo patch-clamp recording. J. Physiol. 521 (Pt 2), 529–535.
Garaschuk, O., Milos, R.I., Grienberger, C., Marandi, N., Adelsberger, H., Konnerth, A.,
2006. Optical monitoring of brain function in vivo: from neurons to networks.
Pflugers Arch. 453, 385–396.
Garcia-Campmany, L., Stam, F.J., Goulding, M., 2010. From circuits to behaviour: motor
networks in vertebrates. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 116–125.
Göbel, W., Helmchen, F., 2007. In vivo calcium imaging of neural network function.
Physiology (Bethesda) 22, 358–365.
Göbel, W., Kerr, J.N., Nimmerjahn, A., Helmchen, F., 2004. Miniaturized two-photon mi-
croscope based on a flexible coherent fiber bundle and a gradient-index lens objec-
tive. Opt. Lett. 29, 2521–2523.
Gordon, I.T., Whelan, P.J., 2008. Brainstem modulation of locomotion in the neonatal
mouse spinal cord. J. Physiol. 586, 2487–2497.
Graham, B.A., Brichta, A.M., Callister, R.J., 2004a. An in vivo mouse spinal cord prepara-
tion for patch-clamp analysis of nociceptive processing. J. Neurosci. Methods 136,
221–228.
Graham, B.A., Brichta, A.M., Callister, R.J., 2004b. In vivo responses of mouse superficial
dorsal horn neurones to both current injection and peripheral cutaneous stimula-
tion. J. Physiol. 561, 749–763.
Greenberg, D.S., Houweling, A.R., Kerr, J.N., 2008. Population imaging of ongoing neuro-
nal activity in the visual cortex of awake rats. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 749–751.
Grewe, B.F., Helmchen, F., 2009. Optical probing of neuronal ensemble activity. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 19, 520–529.
Grewe, B.F., Langer, D., Kasper, H., Kampa, B.M., Helmchen, F., 2010. High-speed in vivo
calcium imaging reveals neuronal network activity with near-millisecond preci-
sion. Nat. Methods 7, 399–405.
Grudt, T.J., Perl, E.R., 2002. Correlations between neuronal morphology and electrophysio-
logical features in the rodent superficial dorsal horn. J. Physiol. 540, 189–207.
Hanisch, U.K., Kettenmann, H., 2007. Microglia: active sensor and versatile effector cells
in the normal and pathologic brain. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1387–1394.
Hasan, M.T., Friedrich, R.W., Euler, T., Larkum, M.E., Giese, G., Both, M., Duebel, J.,
Waters, J., Bujard, H., Griesbeck, O., Tsien, R.Y., Nagai, T., Miyawaki, A., Denk, W.,
2004. Functional fluorescent Ca2+ indicator proteins in transgenic mice under
TET control. PLoS Biol. 2, e163.
Heinke, B., Ruscheweyh, R., Forsthuber, L., Wunderbaldinger, G., Sandkuhler, J., 2004.
Physiological, neurochemical and morphological properties of a subgroup of
GABAergic spinal lamina II neurones identified by expression of green fluorescent
protein in mice. J. Physiol. 560, 249–266.
Helmchen, F., Denk, W., 2005. Deep tissue two-photon microscopy. Nat. Methods 2,
932–940.
Higashijima, S., Masino, M.A., Mandel, G., Fetcho, J.R., 2003. Imaging neuronal activity
during zebrafish behavior with a genetically encoded calcium indicator. J.
Neurophysiol. 90, 3986–3997.
Holtmaat, A., Svoboda, K., 2009. Experience-dependent structural synaptic plasticity in
amplifier of inflammatory pain in the spinal dorsal horn. Science 312, 1659–1662.
Nagayama, S., Zeng, S., Xiong, W., Fletcher, M.L., Masurkar, A.V., Davis, D.J., Pieribone,
V.A., Chen, W.R., 2007. In vivo simultaneous tracing and Ca(2+) imaging of local
neuronal circuits. Neuron 53, 789–803.
Nave, K.A., 2010. Myelination and support of axonal integrity by glia. Nature 468,
244–252.
Nevian, T., Helmchen, F., 2007. Calcium indicator loading of neurons using single-cell
electroporation. Pflugers Arch. 454, 675–688.
26 H.C. Johannssen, F. Helmchen / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 18–26Jin, L.Q., Zhang, G., Jamison Jr., C., Takano, H., Haydon, P.G., Selzer, M.E., 2009. Axon re-
generation in the absence of growth cones: acceleration by cyclic AMP. J. Comp.
Neurol. 515, 295–312.
Johannssen, H.C., Helmchen, F., 2010. In vivo Ca2+ imaging of dorsal horn neuronal
populations in mouse spinal cord. J. Physiol. 588, 3397–3402.
Jung, S., Aliberti, J., Graemmel, P., Sunshine, M.J., Kreutzberg, G.W., Sher, A., Littman,
D.R., 2000. Analysis of fractalkine receptor CX(3)CR1 function by targeted deletion
and green fluorescent protein reporter gene insertion. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20,
4106–4114.
Katona, G., Szalay, G., Maak, P., Kaszas, A., Veress, M., Hillier, D., Chiovini, B., Vizi, E.S.,
Roska, B., Rozsa, B., 2012. Fast two-photon in vivo imaging with three-dimensional
random-access scanning in large tissue volumes. Nat. Methods 9, 201–208.
Kerr, J.N., Denk, W., 2008. Imaging in vivo: watching the brain in action. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 9, 195–205.
Kerr, J.N., Greenberg, D., Helmchen, F., 2005. Imaging input and output of neocortical
networks in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 14063–14068.
Kerschensteiner, M., Schwab, M.E., Lichtman, J.W., Misgeld, T., 2005. In vivo imaging of ax-
onal degeneration and regeneration in the injured spinal cord. Nat. Med. 11, 572–577.
Kim, J.V., Jiang, N., Tadokoro, C.E., Liu, L., Ransohoff, R.M., Lafaille, J.J., Dustin, M.L., 2010.
Two-photon laser scanning microscopy imaging of intact spinal cord and cerebral
cortex reveals requirement for CXCR6 and neuroinflammation in immune cell infil-
tration of cortical injury sites. J. Immunol. Methods 352, 89–100.
Kjaerulff, O., Barajon, I., Kiehn, O., 1994. Sulphorhodamine-labelled cells in the neonatal
rat spinal cord following chemically induced locomotor activity in vitro. J. Physiol.
478 (Pt 2), 265–273.
Kobat, D., Durst, M.E., Nishimura, N., Wong, A.W., Schaffer, C.B., Xu, C., 2009. Deep tis-
sue multiphoton microscopy using longer wavelength excitation. Opt. Express 17,
13354–13364.
Kudo, N., Yamada, T., 1987. N-methyl-D, L-aspartate-induced locomotor activity in a
spinal cord–hindlimb muscles preparation of the newborn rat studied in vitro.
Neurosci. Lett. 75, 43–48.
Kwan, A.C., Dietz, S.B., Webb, W.W., Harris-Warrick, R.M., 2009. Activity of Hb9 inter-
neurons during fictive locomotion in mouse spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 29,
11601–11613.
Kwan, A.C., Dietz, S.B., Zhong, G., Harris-Warrick, R.M., Webb, W.W., 2010. Spatiotem-
poral dynamics of rhythmic spinal interneurons measured with two-photon calci-
um imaging and coherence analysis. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 3323–3333.
Laffray, S., Pages, S., Dufour, H., De Koninck, P., De Koninck, Y., Cote, D., 2011. Adaptive
movement compensation for in vivo imaging of fast cellular dynamics within a
moving tissue. PLoS One 6, e19928.
Lavallee, A., Pflieger, J.F., 2009. Developmental expression of spontaneous activity in
the spinal cord of postnatal opossums, Monodelphis domestica: an anatomical
study. Brain Res. 1282, 1–9.
Light, A.R., Willcockson, H.H., 1999. Spinal laminae I–II neurons in rat recorded in vivo
in whole cell, tight seal configuration: properties and opioid responses. J.
Neurophysiol. 82, 3316–3326.
Lu, Y., Perl, E.R., 2003. A specific inhibitory pathway between substantia gelatinosa
neurons receiving direct C-fiber input. J. Neurosci. 23, 8752–8758.
Lu, Y., Perl, E.R., 2005. Modular organization of excitatory circuits between neurons of
the spinal superficial dorsal horn (laminae I and II). J. Neurosci. 25, 3900–3907.
Lütcke, H., Helmchen, F., 2011. Two-photon imaging and analysis of neural network
dynamics. Rep. Prog. Phys. 74.
Lütcke, H., Murayama, M., Hahn, T., Margolis, D.J., Astori, S., Meyer zum Alten Borgloh,
S., Göbel, W., Yang, Y., Tang, W., Kügler, S., Sprengel, R., Nagai, T., Miyawaki, A.,
Larkum, M.E., Helmchen, F., Hasan, M.T., 2010. Optical recording of neuronal activ-
ity with a genetically-encoded calcium indicator in anesthetized and freely moving
mice. Front. Neural Circuits 4, 9.
Mank, M., Griesbeck, O., 2008. Genetically encoded calcium indicators. Chem. Rev. 108,
1550–1564.
Mank, M., Santos, A.F., Direnberger, S., Mrsic-Flogel, T.D., Hofer, S.B., Stein, V., Hendel,
T., Reiff, D.F., Levelt, C., Borst, A., Bonhoeffer, T., Hubener, M., Griesbeck, O., 2008.
A genetically encoded calcium indicator for chronic in vivo two-photon imaging.
Nat. Methods 5, 805–811.
Miyawaki, A., 2003. Fluorescence imaging of physiological activity in complex systems
using GFP-based probes. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 591–596.
Monif, M., Burnstock, G., Williams, D.A., 2010. Microglia: proliferation and activation
driven by the P2X7 receptor. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 42, 1753–1756.Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F., Kerr, J.N., Helmchen, F., 2004. Sulforhodamine 101 as a
specific marker of astroglia in the neocortex in vivo. Nat. Methods 1, 31–37.
Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F., Helmchen, F., 2005. Resting microglial cells are highly
dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308, 1314–1318.
O'Donovan, M.J., Bonnot, A., Wenner, P., Mentis, G.Z., 2005. Calcium imaging of net-
work function in the developing spinal cord. Cell Calcium 37, 443–450.
Ruscheweyh, R., Ikeda, H., Heinke, B., Sandkuhler, J., 2004. Distinctive membrane and
discharge properties of rat spinal lamina I projection neurones in vitro. J. Physiol.
555, 527–543.
Schnell, L., Fearn, S., Klassen, H., Schwab, M.E., Perry, V.H., 1999. Acute inflammatory
responses to mechanical lesions in the CNS: differences between brain and spinal
cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 11, 3648–3658.
Schouenborg, J., 2008. Action-based sensory encoding in spinal sensorimotor circuits.
Brain Res. Rev. 57, 111–117.
Schultz, S.R., Kitamura, K., Post-Uiterweer, A., Krupic, J., Hausser, M., 2009. Spatial pat-
tern coding of sensory information by climbing fiber-evoked calcium signals in
networks of neighboring cerebellar Purkinje cells. J. Neurosci. 29, 8005–8015.
Silver, J., Miller, J.H., 2004. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5,
146–156.
Stosiek, C., Garaschuk, O., Holthoff, K., Konnerth, A., 2003. In vivo two-photon calcium
imaging of neuronal networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 7319–7324.
Sullivan, M.R., Nimmerjahn, A., Sarkisov, D.V., Helmchen, F., Wang, S.S., 2005. In vivo cal-
cium imaging of circuit activity in cerebellar cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 94, 1636–1644.
Tian, L., Hires, S.A., Mao, T., Huber, D., Chiappe, M.E., Chalasani, S.H., Petreanu, L.,
Akerboom, J., McKinney, S.A., Schreiter, E.R., Bargmann, C.I., Jayaraman, V.,
Svoboda, K., Looger, L.L., 2009. Imaging neural activity in worms, flies and mice
with improved GCaMP calcium indicators. Nat. Methods 6, 875–881.
Todd, A.J., Puskar, Z., Spike, R.C., Hughes, C., Watt, C., Forrest, L., 2002. Projection neu-
rons in lamina I of rat spinal cord with the neurokinin 1 receptor are selectively in-
nervated by substance p-containing afferents and respond to noxious stimulation.
J. Neurosci. 22, 4103–4113.
Torsney, C., Anderson, R.L., Ryce-Paul, K.A., MacDermott, A.B., 2006. Characterization of
sensory neuron subpopulations selectively expressing green fluorescent protein in
phosphodiesterase 1C BAC transgenic mice. Mol. Pain 2, 17.
Tsuda, M., Tozaki-Saitoh, H., Inoue, K., 2010. Pain and purinergic signaling. Brain Res.
Rev. 63, 222–232.
Vajkoczy, P., Laschinger, M., Engelhardt, B., 2001. Alpha4-integrin-VCAM-1 binding
mediates G protein-independent capture of encephalitogenic T cell blasts to CNS
white matter microvessels. J. Clin. Invest. 108, 557–565.
Wang, H., Huff, T.B., Fu, Y., Jia, K.Y., Cheng, J.X., 2007. Increasing the imaging depth of
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy with a miniature microscope
objective. Opt. Lett. 32, 2212–2214.
Warp, E., Agarwal, G., Wyart, C., Friedmann, D., Oldfield, C.S., Conner, A., Del Bene, F.,
Arrenberg, A.B., Baier, H., Isacoff, E.Y., 2012. Emergence of patterned activity in
the developing zebrafish spinal cord. Curr. Biol. 22, 93–102.
Wilson, J.M., Cowan, A.I., Brownstone, R.M., 2007a. Heterogeneous electrotonic cou-
pling and synchronization of rhythmic bursting activity in mouse Hb9 interneu-
rons. J. Neurophysiol. 98, 2370–2381.
Wilson, J.M., Dombeck, D.A., Diaz-Rios, M., Harris-Warrick, R.M., Brownstone, R.M.,
2007b. Two-photon calcium imaging of network activity in XFP-expressing neu-
rons in the mouse. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 3118–3125.
Wilson, J.M., Blagovechtchenski, E., Brownstone, R.M., 2010. Genetically defined inhib-
itory neurons in the mouse spinal cord dorsal horn: a possible source of rhythmic
inhibition of motoneurons during fictive locomotion. J. Neurosci. 30, 1137–1148.
Ylera, B., Erturk, A., Hellal, F., Nadrigny, F., Hurtado, A., Tahirovic, S., Oudega, M.,
Kirchhoff, F., Bradke, F., 2009. Chronically CNS-injured adult sensory neurons
gain regenerative competence upon a lesion of their peripheral axon. Curr. Biol.
19, 930–936.
Yoshimura, M., Jessell, T.M., 1989. Primary afferent-evoked synaptic responses and
slow potential generation in rat substantia gelatinosa neurons in vitro. J.
Neurophysiol. 62, 96–108.
Zeilhofer, H.U., Studler, B., Arabadzisz, D., Schweizer, C., Ahmadi, S., Layh, B., Bösl, M.R.,
Fritschy, J.M., 2005. Glycinergic neurons expressing enhanced green fluorescent
protein in bacterial artificial chromosome transgenic mice. J. Comp. Neurol. 482
(2), 123–141.
Zhong, G., Droho, S., Crone, S.A., Dietz, S., Kwan, A.C., Webb, W.W., Sharma, K., Harris-
Warrick, R.M., 2010. Electrophysiological characterization of V2a interneurons and
their locomotor-related activity in the neonatal mouse spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 30,
170–182.the mammalian brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 647–658.
Ikeda, H., Stark, J., Fischer, H., Wagner, M., Drdla, R., Jager, T., Sandkuhler, J., 2006. Synaptic
