REVIEW ARTICLE
Progress and prospects in neurorehabilitation: clinical
applications of stem cells and brain–computer interface
for spinal cord lesions
Mariana Gongora • Caroline Peressutti •
Sergio Machado • Silmar Teixeira •
Bruna Velasques • Pedro Ribeiro
Received: 11 September 2012 / Accepted: 18 October 2012 / Published online: 17 November 2012
 Springer-Verlag Italia 2012
Abstract Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a disease that affects
millions of people worldwide, causing a temporary or
permanent impairment of neuromotor functions. Mostly
associated to traumatic lesions, but also to other forms of
disease, the appropriate treatment is still unsure. In this
review, several ongoing studies are presented that aim to
provide methods of prevention that ensure quality of life,
and rehabilitation trends to patients who suffer from this
injury. Stem cell research, highlighted in this review, seeks
to reduce damage caused to the tissue, as also provide
spinal cord regeneration through the application of several
types of stem cells. On the other hand, research using
brain–computer interface (BCI) technology proposes the
development of interfaces based on the interaction of
neural networks with artificial tools to restore motor con-
trol and full mobility of the injured area. PubMed, MED-
LINE and SciELO data basis analyses were performed to
identify studies published from 2000 to date, which
describe the link between SCI with stem cells and BCI
technology.
Keywords Spinal cord injury  Regeneration 
Neurorehabilitation  Neural tissue 
Stem cells  BCI
M. Gongora (&)  C. Peressutti  S. Teixeira  B. Velasques 
P. Ribeiro
Brain Mapping and Sensory Motor Integration Laboratory,
Institute of Psychiatry of the Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro (IPUB/UFRJ), Rua Cel. Moreira Cesar, 375/802,
Icaraı́, 24230-054 Niterói, RJ, Brazil
e-mail: marianagongora@gmail.com
C. Peressutti  B. Velasques  P. Ribeiro
Institute of Applied Neuroscience (IAN),
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
S. Machado
Panic and Respiration Laboratory, Institute of Psychiatry,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro,
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
S. Machado
Quiropraxia Program of Faculty of Health Sciences Central
University, Santiago, Chile
S. Machado
Institute of Phylosophy, Federal University of Uberlândia
(IFILO/UFU), Uberlândia, Brazil
S. Machado
Physical Activity Sciences Postgraduate Program, Salgado
de Oliveira University (UNIVERSO), Niterói, Brazil
S. Machado
National Institute of Translational Medicine (INCT-TM),
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
S. Teixeira
Laboratory of Physical therapy, Veiga de Almeida University
of Rio de Janeiro (UVA/RJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
B. Velasques
Neuromuscular Research Laboratory, National Institute of
Traumatology and Orthopaedics (INTO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
B. Velasques
Neurophysiology and Neuropsychology of Attention, Institute
of Psychiatry of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
(IPUB/UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
P. Ribeiro
Bioscience Department (EEFD/UFRJ), School of Physical
Education, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
123
Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433
DOI 10.1007/s10072-012-1232-5
Introduction
One of the current concerns in the field of neuroscience is
the injury repair/neuroregeneration process. Since this is a
form of neuroplasticity, one of the goals is to promote or
reinstall functionality in the injured area [1]. Particularly,
spinal cord injury (SCI) has been the focus of extensive
research in neuroscience; this is characterized by damage
in the spinal canal, resulting in a temporary or permanent
impairment of neuromotor functions [2]. This field in
particular gave rise to various hypotheses that attempt to
explain the control of motor actions. The SCI may result
from traumatic injuries or other congenital, degenerative,
neoplastic and infectious processes, neurological and vas-
cular disorders. Recent studies indicate that trauma is the
leading cause of SCI among young people aged between 15
and 40 years. Motor vehicle accidents are the main cause,
followed by firearm injury, sport accidents and direct
trauma [3]. After injury, evaluations should be performed
at various levels to better intervene in the subsequent
recovery processes. The American Spinal Cord Injury
Association (ASIA) devised a qualitative scale for evalu-
ation and classification of neurological deficit caused after
injury. This assessment classifies a SCI into complete and
incomplete, and evaluates the extent of damage to the
spinal cord tissue, firstly verifying if the primary functions
are preserved [4].
The histological, biochemical and functional aspects of
the disease have attracted great interest among researchers,
who seek to improve the quality of life of patients suffering
from this disabling injury [5]. Different treatments have
been employed aiming to contain the structure involvement
and injury severity. These treatments are based on studies
of spinal cord regeneration using neurotrophic factors, fetal
bone marrow graft, peripheral nerve graft, antibodies
against myelin-associated proteins and stem cells [6].
Concomitantly to these treatments, the emergent field of
neuroengineering has made substantial discoveries in brain
research and brain-computer interfacing (BCI), enabling
patients who suffered severe body paralysis to find other
ways to restore full mobility of the injured area [7].
With this in mind, the present paper reviews the types of
SCI, the basic concepts of stem cells and the BCIs, and
presents the clinical applications of stem cells and BCI on
motor control restoration of patients with spinal cord lesions,
to create an elegant proposal regarding the clinical appli-
cations of these potential therapies in the upcoming years.
Spinal cord lesions: basic concepts
This study will mainly emphasize injuries that affect the
conduction of sensory-motor impulses in the spinal cord
promoting loss of sensation and movement. Trauma in the
spinal cord region undertake the tract and fascicles, which
comprise ascendant and descendent pathways responsible
for transmitting the information to all structure of the
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous
system (PNS). Damage in the spinal cord can be mainly
attributed to trauma, but also may result from other etiol-
ogies. Lesion intensity can range from mild to more severe
injuries, and may be complete or incomplete; in the last the
sensory-motor function in the region that was not affected
is still preserved. The spinal cord hemisection, also known
as Brown-Sequard Syndrome, affects the corticospinal tract
(causing ipsilateral loss of motor function), the fasciculus
gracilis and the cuneate nucleus (causing loss of conscious
proprioception and discriminative touch) [8]. In addition,
spinothalamic tract (anterior and lateral) dysfunction cau-
ses contralateral thermal and pain sensitivity, and loss of
light touch [9, 10]. In complete lesions, the motor function
is totally interrupted below the level of trauma. Sensory
and autonomic motor tracts are disrupted, causing nerve
root damage in the segmented section. A complete trans-
verse section of the spinal cord depending on the level of
the lesion can affect several body parts [11].
The damage caused by injury is analyzed through neu-
rological assessments based on the sensory maps and key
muscles. The ASIA Impairment Scale (AIS) aims to define
exactly the level of neurological injury and the degree of
functional impairment, aiming a prognostic classification
[12]. The scale evaluates the sensitivity levels from C2
through S4–S5, and the function of muscle groups and
reflexes related to the nerve roots from C5 to T1 (brachial
plexus) and from L2 to S1 (lumbar plexus) [4]. The lesions
are classified into five levels (A–E); A = Complete. No
sensory or motor function is preserved in the sacral seg-
ments S4–S5; B = Sensory Incomplete. Sensory but not
motor function is preserved below the neurological level
and includes the sacral segments S4–S5 [light touch, pin
prick at S4–S5: or deep anal pressure (DAP)], and no motor
function is preserved more than three levels below the
motor level on either side of the body; C = Motor
Incomplete. Motor function is preserved below the neuro-
logical level, and more than half of key muscle functions
below the single neurological level of injury (NLI) have a
muscle grade \3 (grades 0–2); D = Motor Incomplete.
Motor function is preserved below the neurological level,
and at least half (half or more) of key muscle functions
below the NLI have a muscle grade C3; E = Normal. If
sensation and motor function as tested with the Interna-
tional Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal
Cord Injury (ISNCSCI) are graded as normal in all seg-
ments, and the patient had no prior deficits, then the AIS
grade is E. Someone without an initial SCI does not receive
an AIS grade.
428 Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433
123
Stem cells: types and functions
The potential uses of stem cells as a medical treatment have
attracted extensive research interest in the recent years. Stem
cells are unspecialized cells that have the unique ability of
self-renewal and to differentiate into multiple specific cell
types, in response to a particular signal [13]. These cells are
divided into two classes, embryonic and adult stem cells,
according to their origin. Embryonic cells are subdivided
into totipotent and pluripotent cells, according to their
potential ability to differentiate into specialized tissue. The
totipotent type is able to differentiate into all cell types in an
adult body [14]; pluripotent cells have the potential to dif-
ferentiate into specialized ectoderm, mesoderm or endoderm
cells [15]. However, despite these unique properties, the use
of embryonic stem cells for rehabilitation treatments is still
polemic, since it involves ethnic and religious questions.
Though, in some countries researches using in vitro embryo
discarded in fertilization process are permitted [14].
In majority, adult stem cells are denominated multipo-
tent cells capable to originate only a few types of cells
lineages [16], but being a non-embryonic potential source
have ethnic and religious advantage to neuroscience
research [17]. These cells are accessible in several organs
and tissues of human body, and in extra-embryonic struc-
tures such as the umbilical cord and placenta [18]. There
are also the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), predecessors
of the conjunctive and muscular tissue cells, which are
found in the umbilical cord [3]. Another extraction source
of the MSCs is found in the bone marrow, on the estromal
region [19]. The cells of this region are able to form
mesodermal tissue such as cells from the bone, cartilagi-
nous, adipose and muscular tissue [20]. Furthermore, in
appropriate fertilization conditions and provided specific
stimulus, MSCs can also differ in central and peripheral
nervous tissue [21]. Therapies with these cells are
increasing due to its easy availability and capacity to
propagate in culture; apart from being non-immunogenic,
which eliminates the problems of rejection and permits an
autologous transplant [22]. Another source of multipotent
stem cells with the capacity of differentiation in nervous
tissue is found in the olfactory epithelium [11]. Denomi-
nated neural stem cells (NSCs) are found in an accessible
region of the brain that may be removed from the patient
without causing significant damage [23]. When they grow
properly, they are capable to secrete several growth factors
such as NGF (neural growth factor), BDNF (brain-derived
neurotrophic factor), GDNF (glial cell line-derived neuro-
trophic factor), FGF (fibroblast growth factor), and VEGF
(vascular endothelial growth factor), that are known to play
a role in the neurogenesis, promoting the growth, mainte-
nance and survival of the nervous cells. Due to its char-
acteristics, the olfactory cells have an important supporting
function in axonal regeneration, and they have been used in
diverse research on nervous tissue regeneration [3].
The procedures with stem cells in the field of neuro-
science bring an exciting prospect in the treatment of
thousands of neurodegenerative diseases and damaged
tissues. Due to differentiation and self-regeneration
capacities, regenerative therapies using stem cells are able
to provide functional improvements to the individual.
Stem cells applied to regeneration of neural tissue
in spinal cord lesions
In the search for efficient treatments, the use of several
sources of stem cells, in group or alone, is researched and
reported in experiments with injured animals or human
beings [15]. As micro-environment conditions of rodent
models appear to be similar to that found in humans,
several techniques are being employed in these popula-
tions. However, these techniques should be applied in
humans only after proving the efficiency and acceptance of
the therapy by the ethics committee [24]. In the following,
some treatment will be presented showing the functional
gains in animals and humans with SCI. Investigations of
SCI in rodent models emphasize that the use of Human
Embryonic Stem Cell-Derived Oligodendrocyte Progenitor
Cell to remyelinate axons, reduces tissue damage [25] and
helps to prevent the return of chronic pain [26], improving
the locomotor function [27, 28]. At present, one of the most
important studies that uses embryonic stem cells as a
therapy for SCI regeneration, is developed by Geron Cor-
poration. From embryos discarded in the process of
fecundation in vitro, Oligodendrocytes (GRNOPC1) were
extracted and employed in therapies with SCI rodent
models [16]. Seven days after SCI, the GRNOPC1 were
implanted in the lesion site. With this procedure, it was
possible to note the production of neurotrophic factor and
remyelination of axons, causing significant repair in loco-
motor capacity and body support. In January 2009, the
corporation received permission of Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to start the first clinical essay in
humans with acute SCI, classified degree A in the evalu-
ation of ASIA. The first stage of the research aimed to
evaluate the security and tolerability of the procedure
applied in humans [29].
Other research line constituted by studies with non-
embryonic stem cells sources, present methods considered
safer and more viable, considering ethical and religious
aspects [30]. Studies with insertion of NSCs in rodents
showed axonal regeneration [31], and recovery of speed
conduction and locomotor function [32]. In another study,
patients with chronic and stable SCI at degree A of ASIA,
had NSCs of mucous olfactory membrane inserted [33].
Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433 429
123
Improvement in ASIA scores [34], and returning of sen-
sibility and voluntary contraction of the anal sphincter [35]
were observed in the transplanted individuals. Trials using
MSCs in damaged animals permitted alterations in the site
of the injury; acute and less acute effects on the tissue were
reduced promoting a permissive site for remyelination and
local repair [19]. Functional regeneration and gradual
improvement of locomotor function as assessed by BBB
score (Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan) [36], incidences of spon-
taneous movements, and neural growth have also been
evidential after MSCs graft in rodents [20, 37]. Approaches
with combined sources of non-embryonic stem cells are
also applied in regenerative therapies. Moviglia et al. [38]
have reported skin sensibility in patients with SCI after
combined applications of MSCs and NSCs. Moreover, the
application of diverse sources of NSCs was capable to
promote urologic, sexual and intestinal function repairing
[18]. Although the main objective of the studies with stem
cells is the search for methods to restore the neural circuits,
the therapies developed until the present moment still do
not show an adequate mechanism to completely restore the
damage in the spinal cord tissue.
Brain–computer interface (BCI): future challenges
During the last decade, the neuroscience research has been
progressing in equal to technological improvement. A
considerable progress has been made in understanding the
CNS organization and, mainly, how the brain is capable to
codify and manipulate high quantity of complex informa-
tion [39–42]. The neuroprosthetic devices based on brain–
computer interface (BCI) technology are a promise for
body mobility regeneration in individuals who suffered any
degenerative injury, limbs loss and neurological diseases
[43]. Interface based on non-invasive techniques are
applied in several clinical researches to detect and evaluate
modular activities in the brain which are related to senso-
rial inputs, intention and cognitive states [44–47]. Besides,
noninvasive mechanisms have been developed to help
disabled individuals in daily living tasks. These types of
BCI are composed of systems for answering ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no’’
to questions, managing the user’s environment, accessing
the internet, or controlling a hand orthosis. Thus, disabled
individuals can perform basic daily living tasks, such as
word processing, catching an object, sending e-mails, or
operating a motorized wheelchair [48].
On the other hand, invasive techniques have been
developed to establish the direct motor control domain
[49]. Due to the disconnection between the brain and the
spinal cord the information provided on the motor cortex is
not transmitted through the pyramidal tract to the effector
organ [50, 51]. These techniques allow a direct channel of
communication between the CNS and the prosthetic devi-
ces, providing a way to restore the lost capacity in spinal
cord injured individuals [52, 53]. Applying the BCIs,
commands can be extracted directly from cerebral activi-
ties. The multiple channels of neural signals are recorded
simultaneously and maintained in a decodification module.
The interface will process and encode the neural signals in
real time, extracting motor commands and sending to a
robotic limb (neuroprosthesis) the brain motor intention,
which still reproduces a motor thought [54].
The interaction of the proprioceptive system with the
motor intention is vital to perform a precise and natural
movement [7]. The proprioceptive feedback rapidly cor-
rects the movement [55]. Thus, the association with the
proprioceptive and the visual feedback allows a better
control of the device [56]. Lebedev and Nicolelis [49]
emphasize that the BCI should promote to the limbs the
same performance, sensation and action of the real limb,
otherwise it can be rejected by the individual. The neuro-
scientists also emphasize that to perform well with the BCI,
multiple artificial signals coming from pressure and posi-
tion sensors inserted in the prosthetic limb should be
assimilated to the cerebral representation. These feedback
signals are capable to educate the brain to incorporate the
artificial proprieties of the neuroprosthesis, modify neurons
located in cortical and subcortical areas that maintain the
representation of the patient’s body. The future importance
of such BCI applications will depend on their capacities,
practicality, reliability and acceptance by particular groups
of users, and on the extent to which they have substantial
advantages over conventional assistive technology.
Therefore, we should evaluate what has actually been
achieved in patients with spinal cord lesions thus far.
Clinical applications of BCI on motor control
restoration in patients with spinal cord lesions
The clinical applications via noninvasive and invasive BCI
may serve as evidence for the feasibility of controlling
neuroprosthesis, providing a solid basis for the develop-
ment of ‘thought’-controlled neuroprosthesis, which seem
to assist patients with severe paralysis to motor control
restoration. Pfurtscheller et al. [57] investigated the possi-
bility of modulating sensorimotor rhythms in a young tet-
raplegic subject since 1998. The patient was able to
modulate sensorimotor rhythms (i.e., central mu-rhythms)
after extensive training, controlling an electro stimulation
device (FES) applied to the forehand muscles. Thus, he
was able to grasp a glass and bring it to his mouth after
4 months of regular training. Three years ago, Pfurtscheller
et al. [58] examined two tetraplegic patients (male, SCI at
level C5 and sub-C5, respectively) using the same task.
430 Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433
123
FES restores the grasp function of the left hand of the first
patient using surface electrodes applied to forearm mus-
cles. The patient learned to induce his sensorimotor
rhythms (i.e., ERD—17 Hz oscillations) through 4 months
of foot MI training. With respect to the second patient, a
FES system was implanted in his right hand and arm. After
3 days of feedback training, the patient learned to induce
an ERD pattern of sensorimotor rhythms during left-hand
MI, allowing a binary control signal to emulate the
shoulder joystick used to operate the FES system.
Trials with invasive methods have been made in animals
and humans; however, the experiments still need to over-
come several obstacles. One of those refers to neural
recording that lacks quality and stability, to prevent inflam-
matory reaction and cerebral tissue damage. In addition, the
degree of freedom in interfaces needs to be enhanced to
provide a stable performance of the neuroproteases. In rela-
tion to the amount of neurons that will efficiently control this
device, Nicolelis and Lebedev [59] includes in his research a
fundamental question that is still being studied: ‘‘What
should be the satisfactory amount of neurons to activate the
motor control restoration?’’ To answer this question, studies
are being conducted in monkeys at the University of Duke in
North Carolina. The neuroproteases, implanted in motor
areas, are based on bidirectional systems in which the motor
control signals are extracted from the brain using a group of
multi-electrodes. The sensorial feedback made by tactile, and
proprioceptive stimuli and other functional signals are sent to
the sensorial areas of the brain through intracortical stimu-
lation (ICMS) [60]. Based on these methods, The Walk
Again Project (WAP), an international scientific consortium
led by researchers of Duke University and composed by two
headquarters,1 has been trying to develop and incorporate the
first brain–machine interface capable of restoring the cor-
poral mobility in SCI or neurodegenerative diseases’
patients. This interface called ‘‘wearable robot’’ will make
possible that movements from all parts of the patient’s body
be controlled and fulfilled by his voluntary brain activity.
This exoskeleton will be designed to sustain and transport the
patient’s body according to his mental will [51].
Another type of BCI, the neuromotor prostheses, refer-
red by Hochberg and co-workers [61], is capable to guide
the movements through the patterns of neural activities in
the primary motor area (M1). The authors have shown that
the neuroprosthesis requires a detection sensor of the
multiple neuron activities and an encoder to translate a
group of discrete patterns in motor commands. In order to
make these commands occur correctly, a neuroprosthesis
should have a device capable to involve the effectors in the
determinate action. In 2004, Hochberg et al. [61] made the
first trial to implant the BCI. Micro-electrodes have been
implanted in M1 area in a 25-year-old woman that in 2001
suffered a SCI at the cervical level resulting in tetraplegia.
After a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) it
could be observed that action potentials were still being
generated in the cortical area, even after 3 years of SCI. In
the same year, a second patient was included in the
research, a 55-year-old man that suffered a SCI in 1999, in
C4 level. After 7 months of adaptation to micro-electrodes
implement in the M1 area, the recording confirmed neural
activity in the M1 area.
In order to stabilize the transformation of the firing
patterns in the M1, Hochberg et al. [61] mentioned that
neural filters generators of bidimensional output signals to
the computer control position should be created with a new
approach for people with paralysis. In this study, the filters
have been used to decode the activity and direction of the
cursor by neural activation. The desired action in the first
moment consisted in the mental visualization of the hands
controlling a computer mouse. After that, the subject was
instructed to follow the movement of the cursor in the
computer. The results of the study indicate that even after
years of damage, and in absence of sensorial feedback and
limb movements, the neurons of the M1 area were still
active and capable to decode the information related to a
specific task. Therefore, the control signal of neural activity
can be used in several interfaces. Simple assistance devices
such as visual interface of e-mails and control of electronic
equipment will help the injured individuals in basic tasks.
Besides, Hochberg et al. [61] describe the employment of a
prosthetic hand to the neural output. After the coupling, the
subject imagined and produced verbal commands (open/
close) leading the hand to open and close the fingers. Due
to interfering factors such as the modest implanted area, the
chosen approach for filters construction, and the attention
and motion state, the subject showed an inferior level of
control of actions when compared to healthy individuals.
Conclusion
As outlined in the previous sections two distinct methods
were shown which can be considered promising approa-
ches in neurorehabilitation for SCI progress; however, their
true potential in the spinal cord repair have not yet clearly
been shown. The use of stem cells in the therapeutic field is
still dealing with barriers of ethics and religion. which do
not allow researching with all types of stem cells. At the
same time, the BCI technology is facing limitations in
developing artificial tools which are capable of linking the
1 The Center for Neuroprosthetics at the École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), in Switzerland, and the Laboratory
of Dr. Gordon Cheng at the Technical University of Munich in
Germany are the houses of the European headquarters of the WAP
and the Latin American headquarters, the Brazilian National Institute
of Brain–Machine Interface located in Natal, Brazil [51].
Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433 431
123
living brain tissue and being incorporated. Then there is
still no clear evidence that either stem cells or BCI tech-
nology presently makes the cure for SCI possible. Studies
have been developed around the world, and maybe we will
see one of these therapies being successful in the near future.
References
1. Bazley FA, All AH, Thakor NV, Maybhate A (2011) Plasticity
associated changes in cortical somatosensory evoked potentials
following spinal cord injury in rats. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med
Biol Soc 2011:2005–2008
2. Musienko P, Heutschi J, Friedli L, Van den Brand R, Courtine G
(2012) Multi-system neurorehabilitative strategies to restore
motor functions following severe spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol
235(1):100–109
3. Sobani ZA, Quadri SA, Enam SA (2010) Stem cells for spinal
cord regeneration: current status. Surg Neurol Int 1:93
4. Gaspar MIFAS, Cliquet Junior A, Lima VMF, Abreu DCC
(2008) Evaluation of ASIA and somatosensory evoked potential
in individuals with paraplegia. Coluna 7(3):223–229
5. Barros Filho TEP, Oliveira RP, Tsanaclis AM, Barros EMK,
Cristante AF, Palma RM et al (2002) An experimental model for the
transplantation of fetal central nervous system cells to the injured
spinal cord in rats. Rev Hosp Clı́n Fac Med S Paulo 57(6):257–264
6. Narazaki DK, de Barros Filho TEP, de Oliveira CRGCM, Cris-
tante AF, Iutaka AS, Marcon R, Oliveira RP (2006) Spinal Cord
regeneration: the action of neurotrophin-3 in spinal cord injury in
rats. Clinics 61(5):453–460
7. Suminski AJ, Tkach DC, Hatsopoulos NG (2009) Exploiting
multiple sensory modalities in brain–machine interfaces. Neural
Netw 22:1224–1234
8. Filli LB, Weinmann O, Schwab ME (2011) Motor deficits and
recovery in rats with unilateral spinal cord hemisection mimic the
Brown-Sequard syndrome. Brain 134(8):2261–2273
9. Choi Kyeong Bo, Lee Choon Dae, Chung Dai-Jin, Lee Sang-Ho
(2009) Cervical disc herniation as a cause of Brown-Séquard
syndrome. J Korean Neurosurg Soc 46(5):505–510
10. Ghosh A, Sydekum E, Florent Haiss F, Peduzzi S, Zörner B,
Schneider R, Baltes C, Rudin M et al (2009) Functional and
anatomical reorganization of the sensory-motor cortex after
incomplete spinal cord injury in adult rats. J Neurosci 29(39):
12210–12219
11. Thuret S, Moon LDF, Gage FH (2006) Therapeutic interventions
after spinal cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 7(8):628–643
12. Neves MA, Mello MP, Antonioli R, Freitas MRG (2007) Func-
tional and clinical scales in management of individuals with
traumatic injuries of spinal cord. Rev Neurosci 15(3):234–239
13. Bydlowski SP, Debes AA, Duarte SA, Janz FL, Cavaglieri RC,
Maselli LMF (2009) Células-tronco do lı́quido amniótico. Ver
Brás Hematol Hemoter 31 suppl 11 (in Portuguese)
14. Tewarie RSN, Hurtado A, Bartels RH, Grotenhuis A, Oudega M
(2009) Stem cell-based therapies for spinal cord injury. J Spinal
Cord Med 32(2):105–114
15. Rossi SL, Keirstead HS (2009) Stem cells and spinal cord
regeneration. Curr Opin Biotech 20:552–562
16. Jones R, Lebkowski J, McNiece I (2010) Stem Cells. Biol Blood
Marrow Transplant 16(1 suppl):S115–S118
17. Bydlowski SP, Debes AA, Maselli LMF, Janz FL (2009) Cara-
cterı́sticas biológicas das células-tronco mesenquimais. Rev Bras
Hematol Hemoter 31(1 suppl):25–35
18. Ichim TE, Solano F, Lara F, Paris E, Ugalde F, Rodriguez JP et al
(2010) Feasibility of combination allogeneic stem cell therapy for
spinal cord injury: a case report. Int Arch Med 11(3):30
19. Wright KT, Masri WE, Osman A, Chowdhury J, Johnson WEB
(2011) Concise review: bone marrow for the treatment of spinal
cord injury: mechanisms and clinical applications. Stem Cells
29:169–178
20. Wu S, Suzuki Y, Ejiri Y, Noda T, Bai H, Kitada M et al (2003)
Bone marrow stromal cells enhance differentiation of cocultured
neurosphere cells and promote regeneration of injured spinal
cord. J Neurosci Res 72:343–351
21. Abdallah BM, Kassem M (2008) Human mesenchymal stem
cells: from basic biology to clinical applications. Gene Ther
15(2):109–116
22. Zietlow R, Lane EL, Dunnett SB, Rosser AE (2008) Human stem
cells for CNS repair. Cell Tissue Res 331:301–322
23. Gögel S, Gubernator M, Minger SL (2011) Progress and pros-
pects: stem cells and neurological diseases. Gene Ther 18:1–6
24. Liverman CT, Altevogt M, Joy JE, Johnson RT (2005) Spinal
cord injury: progress, promise, and priorities. The National
Academies Press, Washington
25. Zhang YW, Denham J, Thies RS (2000) Oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells derived from human embryonic stem cells express
neurotrophic factors. Stem Cells Dev 15:943–952
26. Glazova M, Pak ES, Moretto J, Hollis S, Brewer KL, Murashov
AK (2009) Pre-differentiated embryonic stem cells promote
neuronal regeneration by cross-coupling of BDNF and IL-6 sig-
naling pathways in the host tissue. J Neurotrauma 26(7):
1029–1042
27. Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G, Totoiu M, Cloutier F, Sharp K
et al (2005) Human embryonic cell-derived oligodendrocyte
progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and restore locomotion
after spinal injury. J Neurosci 25:4694–4705
28. Nistor GI, Totoiu MO, Haque N, Carpenter MK, Keirstead H
(2005) Human embryonic stem cells differentiate into oligoden-
drocytes in high purity and myelinate after spinal cord trans-
plantation. Glia 49:385–396
29. Priest C, Davies A, Wirth E, Conta A, Polonskaya Y, Polons-
kowski J (2009) Preclinical development of oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells derived from human embryonic stem cells for the
treatment of spinal cord injury. Cell Transplant 18:231
30. Rabinovich SS, Seledtsov VI, Poveschenko OV, Senuykov VV,
Taraban VY, Yarochno VI et al (2003) Transplantation treatment
of spinal cord injury patients. Biomed Pharmacother 57(9):
428–433
31. Yan J, Xu L, Welsh AM, Hatfield G, Hazel T, Johe K et al (2007)
Extensive neuronal differentiation of human neural stem cell
grafts in adult rat spinal cord. PLoS Med. 4(2):e39
32. Salazar DL, Uchida N, Hamers FPT, Cummings BJ, Anderson AJ
(2010) Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote loco-
motor recovery in an early chronic spinal cord injury NOD-scid
mouse model. PLoS ONE 5(8):e12272
33. Féron F, Perry C, Cochrane J, Licina P, Nowitzke A, Urquhart S
et al (2005) Autologous olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation
in human spinal cord injury. Brain 128:2951–2960
34. Huang H, Chen L, Wang H, Xiu B, Li B, Wang R et al (2003)
Influence of patients’ age on functional recovery after trans-
plantation of olfactory ensheathing cells into injured spinal cord
injury. Chin Med J 116(10):1488–1491
35. Lima C, Escada P, Pratas-Vital J, Branco C, Arcangeli CA,
Lazzeri G et al (2010) Olfactory mucosal autografts and reha-
bilitation for chronic traumatic spinal cord injury. Neurorehabil
Neural Repair 24:10–22
36. Cizková D, Rosocha J, Vanicky I, Jergova S, Cizek M (2006)
Transplants of human mesenchymal stem cells improve functional
432 Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433
123
recovery after spinal cord injury in the rat. Cell Mol Neurobiol
26:1165–1178
37. Ankeny DP, McTigue DM, Jakeman LB (2004) Bone marrow
transplants provide tissue protection and directional guidance for
axons after contusive spinal cord injury in rats. Exp Neurol 190:17–31
38. Moviglia GA, Viña RF, Brizuela JA, Saslavsky J, Vrsalovic F,
Varela G et al (2006) Combined protocol of cell therapy for
chronic spinal cord injury. Report on the electrical and functional
recovery of two patients. Cytotherapy 8(3):202–209
39. Lebedev MA, Tate AJ, Hanson TL, Li Z, O’Doherty JE, Winans
JA et al (2011) Future developments in brain–machine interface
research. Clinics 66(S1):25–32
40. JdR Millán, Rupp R, Müller-Putz GR, Murray-Smith R, Gi-
ugliemma C, Tangermann M et al (2010) Combining brain–
computer interfaces and assistive technologies: state-of-the-art
and challenges. Front Neurosci. 4:161
41. Birbaumer N, Cohen LG (2007) Brain–computer interfaces:
communication and restoration of movement in paralysis.
J Physiol 579(3):621–636
42. Partil PG, Turner DA (2008) The development of brain–machine
interface neuroprosthetic devices. Neurotherapeutic 5(1):137–146
43. Fagg AH, Hatsopoulos NG, de Lafuente V, Moxon KA, Nemati
S, Rebesco JM et al (2007) Biomimetic brain machine interfaces
for the control of movement. J Neurosci 27(44):11842–11846
44. Krepki R, Blankertz B, Curio G, Müller KR (2007) The Berlin
Brain-Computer Interface (BBCI)—towards a new communica-
tion channel for online control in gaming applications. Multimed
Tools Appl
45. Kreilinger A, Kaiser V, Breitwieser C, Williamson J, Neuper C,
Müller-Putz GR (2011) Switching between manual control and
brain–computer interface using long term and short term quality
measures. Front Neurosci 5:147
46. Liao LD, Chen CY, Wang IJ, Chen SF, Li SY, Chen Bw et al
(2012) Gaming control using a wearable and wireless EEG-based
brain–computer interface device with novel dry foam-based
sensors. J Neuroeng Rehabil 28(9):5
47. Doud AJ, Lucas JP, Pisansky MT, He B (2011) Continuous three-
dimensional control of a virtual helicopter using a motor imagery
based brain–computer interface. PLoS ONE 6(10):e26322
48. Andersen RA, Musallam S, Pesaran B (2004) Selecting the signals
for a brain–machine interface. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:720–726
49. Lebedev MA, Nicolelis MAL (2006) Brain–machine interfaces:
past, present and future. Trends Neurosci 29(9):536–546
50. Friehs GM, Zerris VA, Ojakangas CL, Fellows MR, Donoghue JP
(2004) Brain–machine and brain–computer Interfaces. Stroke.
35[suppl I]:2702–2705
51. Nicolelis M (2011) Muito além do nosso eu: a nossa neurociência
que une cérebros e maquinas—e como ela pode mudar nossas
vidas. São Paulo, Companhia das Letras (in portuguese)
52. Mahmoudi B, Sanchez JC (2011) A symbiotic brain–machine
interface through value-based decision making. PLoS ONE 6(3):
e14760
53. Scherberger H (2009) Neural control of motor prostheses. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 19:1–5
54. Wang W, Collinger JL, Perez MA, Tyler-Kabara EC, Cohen LG,
Birbaumer N et al (2010) Neural interface technology for reha-
bilitation: exploiting and promoting neuroplasticity. Phys Med
Rehabil Clin N Am 21:157–178
55. Hatsopoulos NG, Donoghue JP (2009) The science of neural
interface system. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:249–266
56. Suminski AJ, Tkach DC, Fagg AH, Hatsopoulos NG (2010)
Incorporating feedback from multiple sensory modalities enhan-
ces brain–machine interface control. J Neurosci 30(50):16777–
16787
57. Pfurtscheller G, Guger C, Müller G, Krausz G, Neuper C (2000)
Brain oscillations control hand orthosis in a tetraplegic. Neurosci
Lett 292:211–214
58. Pfurtscheller G, Müller GR, Pfurtscheller J, Gerner HJ, Rupp R
(2003) Thought-control of functional electrical stimulation to
restore hand grasp in a patient with tetraplegia. Neurosci Lett
351:33–36
59. Nicolelis MA, Lebedev MA (2009) Principles of neural ensemble
physiology underlying the operation of brain–machine interfaces.
Nat Rev Neurosci 10:530–540
60. O’Doherty JE, Lebedev MA, Hanson TL, Fitzsimmons NA, Ni-
colelis MA (2009) A brain–machine interface instructed by direct
intracortical microstimulation. Front Integr Neurosci 3:20
61. Hochberg LR, Serruya MD, Friehs GM, Mukand JA, Saleh M,
Caplan AH, Branner A, Chen D, Penn RD, Donoghue JP (2006)
Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with
tetraplegia. Nature 442:164–171
Neurol Sci (2013) 34:427–433 433
123
