Neuron
n
j
E
a
tio
w
,
s
53
13
U
fhas been made toward characterizing the mechanisms under-
lying axon and dendrite differentiation (Arimura and Kaibuchi,
2007; Barnes and Polleux, 2009; Stiess and Bradke, 2011).
are important for mediating the signaling that elicits neurite
formation, the intrinsic mechanism of neurite formation itself
does not depend on Ena/VASP.However, the first steps—when neurons initially transform from
spheres to cells with neurites, the cylindrically shaped subcel-
We have therefore searched for an actin-regulating factor that
drives the intrinsic process of neurite formation. An importantactin regulatory proteins, ADF/Cofilin, provides the
required control of actin retrograde flow and
dynamics to form neurites. In particular, the F-actin
severing activity of ADF/Cofilin organizes space for
the protrusion and bundling of microtubules, the
backbone of neurites. Our data reveal how ADF/
Cofilin organizes the cytoskeleton to drive actin
retrograde flow and thus break the spherical shape
of neurons.
INTRODUCTION
Neurons undergo dramatic morphological transformations
during development. In the mammalian nervous system, they
start out as simple symmetric spheres but develop into highly
elaborate cells with distinct axonal and dendritic compartments
(Rasband, 2010). For the latter stages of this process, progress
unclear. Moreover, it is unresolved which actin-dynamizing
factors could regulate the cytoskeleton to enable neurite forma-
tion during brain development.
Studies of neuronal growth cones showed that the actin cyto-
skeleton undergoes an organized process of actin assembly/
disassembly and actomyosin contractility to generate actin
retrograde flow and growth cone translocation (Lowery and
Van Vactor, 2009; Schaefer et al., 2008). The precise role of actin
retrograde flow and the players involved in neuritogenesis
are largely unknown. Several factors that directly or indirectly
regulate actin dynamics have been proposed to facilitate neuri-
togenesis (da Silva and Dotti, 2002). For example, the actin
filament anticapping factors, enabled/vasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein (Ena/VASP), are important for neuritogenesis
as mouse neurons lacking all three Ena/Vasp isoforms
(Mena/VASP/EVL) remain spherical (Kwiatkowski et al., 2007).
However, neurite formation can be restored in these neurons
upon the activation of integrin signaling by plating them on lam-
inin (Dent et al., 2007). This suggests that although Ena/VASPArticle
ADF/Cofilin-Mediated Actin
Directs Neurite Formation i
Kevin C. Flynn,1,2 Farida Hellal,2 Dorothee Neukirchen,1 Son
Sina Stern,2 Boyan K. Garvalov,1,5 Christine Gurniak,6 Alisa
James R. Bamburg,7 J. Victor Small,3 Walter Witke,6 and Fr
1Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Axonal Growth and Regenera
2German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Axonal Gro
3Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Austrian Academy of Sciences
4German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Schillerstra
5Institute of Neuropathology, Justus Liebig University, Aulweg 123, 3
6Institute of Genetics, University of Bonn, Karlrobert-Kreiten Strasse
7Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State
8Cellular Dynamics and Cell Patterning Group, Max Planck Institute o
*Correspondence: frank.bradke@dzne.de
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.038
SUMMARY
Neurites are the characteristic structural element of
neurons that will initiate brain connectivity and elab-
orate information. Early in development, neurons are
spherical cells but this symmetry is broken through
the initial formation of neurites. This fundamental
step is thought to rely on actin and microtubule
dynamics. However, it is unclear which aspects of
the complex actin behavior control neuritogenesis
and which molecular mechanisms are involved.
Here, we demonstrate that augmented actin retro-
grade flow and protrusion dynamics facilitate neurite
formation. Our data indicate that a single family ofNeRetrograde Flow
the Developing Brain
a Jacob,3 Sabina Tahirovic,1,4 Sebastian Dupraz,2
. Shaw,7 Liane Meyn,1,2 Roland Wedlich-Söldner,8
nk Bradke1,2,*
n Group, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
th and Regeneration, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175 Bonn, Germany
Dr. Bohrgasse 3, A-1030 Vienna, Austria
se 44, 80336 Munich, Germany
92 Giessen, Germany
, 53115 Bonn, Germany
niversity, 1870 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
lular precursors of axons and dendrites (da Silva and Dotti,
2002)—remain enigmatic.
Neurites contain bundled microtubules and are tipped with an
actin-rich growth cone (Conde and Cáceres, 2009). Past studies
have identified essential features that turn nonneuronal cells
into cells with neurite-like processes (Dehmelt et al., 2003; Edson
et al., 1993). In hepatoma cells, overexpression of the neuron-
specific microtubule-associated protein (MAP), MAP2c, gener-
ates microtubule bundles that, in conjunction with pharmacolog-
ical depolymerization of cortical actin, enable neurite-like growth
(Edson et al., 1993). This study raised the possibility that micro-
tubule bundling and a dynamic cortical actin cytoskeleton,
through which bundled microtubules protrude, could be the
key intracellular processes underlying neurite formation.
However, the events during neuritogenesis in neurons are stilluron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1091
Figure 1. Actin Filament Organization and Dynamics Determine Neurite Formation
(A) Single frames of live-cell imaging of Lifeact-GFP and EB3-mCherry in a neuron undergoing neuritogenesis. The bottom panels show a magnified region from
the top panels. Arrowheads indicate progressive bundling of microtubules over time. See also Movie S1. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1092 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
criterion for such a factor, deduced from the work of Edson et al.
(1993), is that the candidate protein must enable F-actin disas-
sembly and rearrangements that facilitate the protrusion of
bundled microtubules out of the neuronal sphere to form a
neurite. However, none of the proteins with strong actin fila-
ment-depleting activity studied so far affect neurite formation
in physiological situations, including gelsolin (Lu et al., 1997).
One prime candidate is the family of actin depolymerizing factor
(ADF)/Cofilin (AC), which enhances actin dynamics in three
ways: by depolymerization (accelerating monomer loss at the
pointed end), by severing filaments into shorter protomers, and
by directly or indirectly facilitating actin filament growth (Andria-
nantoandro and Pollard, 2006; Bernstein and Bamburg, 2010).
We conclude that AC regulates neuritogenesis by driving actin
turnover and organization, which is necessary for microtubule
penetration and coalescence.
RESULTS
Neuritogenesis Requires Actin Turnover
We sought to characterize actin and microtubule dynamics
during neurite formation. To date, such studies were hampered
by the fact that fluorescently labeled actin could only be repeti-
tively imaged in primary mammalian neurons for short time
periods or with low temporal resolution (Dent et al., 2007; Flynn
et al., 2009). We therefore used neurons from Lifeact-GFP
n
lin
3
us
ti
a
ati
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite FormationAC proteins increase actin turnover in vitro (Carlier et al., 1997),
enhance actin retrograde flow in epithelial cells (Delorme et al.,
2007), and positively regulate growth cone dynamics in dorsal
root ganglion neurons (Endo et al., 2003). Of the three mamma-
lian AC family isoforms found in mammals, ADF and Cofilin-1 are
both expressed in the mammalian brain with Cofilin-1 (hereafter
simply ‘‘Cofilin’’) as the dominant isoform (Bellenchi et al., 2007).
However, the genetic deletion of Cofilin in the nervous system
reduces neuronal cell proliferation and migration but not neurite
formation (Bellenchi et al., 2007). Moreover, the genetic ablation
of ADF affects neither the development of the nervous system,
nor the formation of neurites in particular (Bellenchi et al.,
2007). Thus, so far, no actin filament modulator has been identi-
fied that regulates physiological neuritogenesis.
Here, we observed that increased actin dynamics are corre-
lated with and necessary for the emergence of neurites out of
the neuronal sphere. Although required for neuritogenesis,
microtubules mainly follow the lead of the progressively dynamic
actin cytoskeleton. Genetic ablation of a single family of
actin-regulating proteins, ADF and Cofilin (hereafter ‘‘AC KO’’),
resulted in a failure of neuritogenesis due to profound cytoskel-
etal aberrations, including a blockade of F-actin retrograde
flow and irregular microtubule growth. In the absence of AC
proteins, pharmacological depolymerization of actin filaments
enabled bundled microtubules to penetrate through the cell rim
leading to neurite formation. The actin-severing activity was
primarily linked to actin retrograde flow and neurite formation.
(B) Live-cell imaging of Lifeact-GFP and EB3-mCherry in a neuron undergoing
panel shows a maximum intensity projection of EB3-mCherry over 3 min. The
a nonneurite-forming region. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
(C) The graph displays the average normalized intensity values of line scans of EB
nonneurite-forming regions in stage 1 cells; n = 10.
(D) The bar graphs display quantifications of the average retrograde flow, protr
nonneurite-forming regions in stage 1, stage 1-2, and stage 2 cells; n = 8.
(E) The treatment of stage 1 neurons with latrunculin B accelerates neurite forma
shown. Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(F) Quantification of the developmental stage of neurons with the indicated tre
neurites (Dotti et al., 1988); nR 250 cells from three separate experiments.
(G) The treatment of stage 1 neurons with jasplakinolide attenuates neurite form
shown. Scale bar represents 20 mm.(H) Quantification of the developmental stage of neurons with the indicated treat
(I) ADF/Cofilin activity in stage 2 neurons compared to stage 1 neurons shown by r
ratios. F-actin is stained with fluorescent phalloidin. Scale bar represents 20 mm
(J) Quantification of average Cofilin activity; nR 75 cells from three separate ex
**p < 0.01, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Nemice, which exhibited stable green fluorescent protein (GFP)
fluorescence to visualize actin dynamics with minimal photo-
bleaching and phototoxicity (Riedl et al., 2010). To track
polymerizing microtubules, we transfected Lifeact-GFP neurons
with mCherry-tagged end-binding protein 3 (EB3-mCherry)
(Akhmanova and Steinmetz, 2008). Within hours after plating,
neurons assumed a characteristic ‘‘fried-egg’’ morphology
(stage 1) (Dotti et al., 1988), with a circumferential actin-rich
lamellipodium exhibiting moderate motility (Figure 1A, see
Movie S1 available online). During neuritogenesis, filopodia
became engorged with growing microtubules, expanded a
growth cone, and progressed into a nascent neurite (Figure 1A).
In addition, broad actin-based growth cone-like structures
became more active and began advancing away from the
soma, extending the membrane in their wake, which con-
solidated into a nascent neurite (Figure 1A). Initially, splayed
microtubules closely trailed advancing actin structures and
later coalesced into bundles as the neurite took shape (Figures
1A and S1A, Movie S1). Before neurite formation, microtubules
advanced further into the periphery in neurite-forming zones
compared to nonneurite-forming regions (Figures 1B and 1C).
As neurite formation commenced (stage 1-2), the F-actin struc-
tures in nonneurite regions largely abated into stable, cortical
actin in stark contrast to extending neurites, which displayed
lamellipodia and filopodia with augmented dynamics (Fig-
ure S1B). Actin retrograde flow was higher in neurite-forming
zones (7.2 ± 1.7 mm/min) compared to regions that did not
euritogenesis. Arrowheads indicate future sites of neurite formation. The right
es indicate sites where line scans were taken for a neurite-forming region and
-mCherrymaximum intensity projections in neurite-forming zones compared to
ion frequency, and protrusion distance in neurite-forming zones compared to
on. Fluorescent staining for bIII tubulin and F-actin with fluorescent phalloidin is
tments. Stage 1, no neuritis; stage 2, minor neuritis; stage 3, axon and minor
on. Fluorescent staining for bIII tubulin and F-actin with fluorescent phalloidin isments; nR 200 cells from three separate experiments.
atio of total Cofilin and phosphorylated Cofilin. Warmer colors represent higher
.
periments.
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1093
Figure 2. ADF/Cofilin Is Necessary for Neuritogenesis
(A) Western blot of E17 cortex from wild-type (WT), conditional (nestin-cre) cofilinmonoallele (ADF/,Cof+/), ADFmonoallele (ADF+/, Cof/), and ADF/Cofilin
double knockout (AC KO). ADF (bottom band) and Cofilin (top band) were both detected by a single antibody.
(B) Confocal micrographs of fluorescent stainings for Tau-1 (green) and F-actin (red) of E17 neocortical coronal sections from wild-type and ADF/Cofilin double
knockout (AC KO) brains. Scale bar represents 1 mm.
(C) The left panels show confocal micrographs of Trb-1 (green, layer VI, preplate marker) and Ctip-2 (red, layer V, cortical plate marker) and the right panels show
confocal micrographs of Cux-1 (green, VZ, SVZ, and cortical plate marker) and DAPI (blue, all cells) of E17 neocortical coronal sections from wild-type, ADF
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1094 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
form neurites (1.8 ± 1.4 mm/min, p < 0.001), actin-based
membrane protrusions were more frequent (0.5 ± 0.1 protru-
sions/min versus 0.1 ± 0.1 protrusions/min, p < 0.001), and these
protrusions extended a greater distance (2.2 ± 0.5 mm versus
1.0 ± 0.4 mm, p < 0.001) (Figure 1D). In addition, actin retrograde
flow, protrusion frequency, and protrusion distance increased
in neurite-forming regions in stage 1-2 and stage 2 neurons
compared to stage 1 neurons (Figure S1C).
As microtubules protrude closer to the leading edge in neurite
forming zones, where actin is also more dynamic, we wondered
whether actin destabilization accelerates neurite formation. In
family are prime candidates for such activity. Live-cell imaging
experiments showed that neurons expressing Cofilin-RFP had
increased retrograde flow rates compared to neurons express-
ing RFP (8.3 ± 1.4 mm/min versus 5.1 ± 0.6 mm/min for RFP
control, p < 0.001, Figures S2E and S2F). Immunocytochemistry
for active AC (ratio of total cofilin/phosphorylated cofilin)
revealed that stage 2 growth cones had elevated AC activity
compared to stage 1 cells (2.8 ± 1.0 versus 1.1 ± 0.4, p < 0.01;
Figures 1I–1J).
To test the physiological role of AC proteins in neuritogenesis,
we generated mice with brain-targeted deletion of both ADF
in
ts
e
c
. S
ec
o
is
at
d
C
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formationfact, within 6 hr after plating, more than 95% of the neurons
treated with 500 nM latrunculin B contained neurites. Hence,
latrunculin treatment induced over a 12-fold decrease in
the percent of neurons without neurites (3.7% ± 0.72% for
500 nM latrunculin B versus 45.5% ± 3.6% for DMSO, p <
0.001; Figures 1E and 1F). Moreover, local application of latrun-
culin B induced neurite protrusions at the site of actin destabi-
lization (Figure S1D). Moderate microtubule stabilization by
low doses of taxol, which induces supernumary axons in
neurons already containing neurites (Witte et al., 2008), did
not augment neurite formation (Figures S2A and S2B). To
determine whether actin turnover is necessary for neuritogene-
sis, we treated stage 1 neurons with the F-actin stabilizing
drug jasplakinolide. Nanomolar doses of jasplakinolide com-
pletely abolished retrograde flow after 1 hr (Figure S2C). At
5 nM jasplakinolide, neurons still displayed normal features
of the actin cytoskeleton, including filopodia (Figure 1G).
However, at 10 nM jasplakinolide, the organization of the cyto-
skeleton was disrupted with abnormal F-actin accumulations
and looping microtubules. After 1 day in vitro (DIV), jasplakino-
lide-treated neurons largely failed to form neurites, resulting in
a more than 2-fold increase in stage 1 cells (70.2% ± 1.4% for
10 nM jasplakinolide versus 27.7% ± 3.5% for DMSO, p <
0.001; Figure 1H). Thus, actin turnover is a critical regulator of
neuritogenesis.
Neuritogenesis Requires ADF/Cofilin Proteins
We hypothesized that the activity of an endogenous factor
underlies the observed increase in actin disassembly and turn-
over, facilitating the radial growth of microtubule bundles during
neurite formation (Figure S2D). Proteins of the ADF/Cofilin (AC)
monoallele, and ADF/Cofilin double knockout (AC KO) brains. The markers are
greatly reduced in the top layers of the cortex (arrowhead). Scale bar represen
(D) Confocal fluorescent micrographs of neurofilament staining of E17 wild-typ
(E) Higher magnification of confocal fluorescent micrographs of E17 AC KO
arrowheads). However, a few neurons have short neurites (yellow arrowheads)
(F) Confocal fluorescentmicrographs of E18.5 cortices transfected via in utero el
or Cre + YFP vectors. The YFP (green) shows the individual transfected cells in c
axonal tracts are formed by the control neurons (arrowheads), which are dimin
(G) Camera lucida traces of individual cells from the SVZ of in utero electropor
(H) Quantification of the distribution of control (green tones) and Cre-transfecte
(I) Quantification of cells with no neurites in the SVZ for control (YFP) and Cre ((J) Fluorescent micrographs of GFP, bIII tubulin, and F-actin of wild-type (GFP
arrowheads) neurons at 1 day in vitro (1 DIV) and 2 DIV. Scale bar represents 10
(K) Stacked bar graph of neurite growth phenotypes in wild-type andACKO neuro
from four experiments.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Neand Cofilin (AC KO). We crossed ADF KO mice (ADF/) with
brain-specific Cofilin KO mice (Nestin Cre+/, cofilin flox/flox) by
standard genetic crossings (Bellenchi et al., 2007). The AC
KO progeny were observed at expected Mendelian ratios at
embryonic days 15–17 (E15–E17) but diedwithin 12 hr after birth.
Using an antibody that recognizes both ADF and Cofilin in
mouse, we confirmed that ADF was undetectable while Cofilin
had a slight residual expression in the AC KO at E17 due to inter-
calation of the meninges in the cortical tissue (Figures 2A and
S3C). At this age, AC KOmice had multiple severe abnormalities
in all areas of the brain compared to wild-type control brains.
First, AC KO brains displayed drastic cortical hypoplasia and
extreme ventricle expansion (Figures 2B, S3A, and S3B).
Second, AC KO brains showed cortical ectopias, resembling
the cobblestone-like cortex observed in type II lissencephaly,
an archetypal neuronal migration disorder (Figure S3C) (Bielas
et al., 2004). Consistent with a defect in neuronal migration,
cortical lamination was drastically disrupted in the AC KO
brains and neurons of the distinct layers were intermingled
(Figures 2C and S3B). The brain morphology of the ADF mono-
allele (NesCre+/, ADF+/, cofilin flox/flox) had a similar, though
less profound, phenotype (Figures S3A and S3B). In contrast
to the ADF monoallele, cofilin monoallele (NesCre+/, ADF/,
cofilin flox/+) brains were morphologically indistinguishable from
wild-type brains, as previously reported for ADF KO mice (data
not shown) (Bellenchi et al., 2007).
Immunostaining with the axonal marker Tau-1 revealed that
there were no obvious axonal tracts in the AC KO and the ADF
monoallele brains, even in regions of the brain that remained
intact (Figures 2B, S3A, and S3B). We confirmed the dele-
terious effects of AC ablation on cortical mass and axon tract
termingled in the AC KO and to a lesser degree in the ADFmonoallele. Cux1 is
200 mm.
and AC KO cortex. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
ortex. The AC KO neurons are mainly spherical and lack protrusions (white
cale bar represents 10 mm.
troporation ofADF/, Cofilinflox/flox brains at E14with either YFP control vector
ntrol conditions (left) and in knockdown conditions (Cre expression, right). Long
hed in Cre-expressing neurons. Scale bar represents 200 mm.
ion experiments. Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(gray tones) cells within the cortex. nR 1480 cells from five experiments.
re + YFP) neurons. nR 540 cells from five experiments.positive) and ADF/Cofilin knockout (AC KO, GFP negative, indicated with
mm.
nal cultures at different stages of development. nR 500 cells for each time point
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1095
Figure 3. ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Actin Organization
(A) Fluorescent images of F-actin (phalloidin) in stage 1 wild-type and AC KO neurons. F-actin density and disorganization is increased in AC KO neurons. The
right panels are magnified views of the indicated regions. Arrowheads indicate filopodia. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
(B) Quantification of relative F-actin levels indicates a 2.5-fold increase in AC KO neurons compared to wild-type neurons. The bar graph represents the averages
of three experiments, nR 120 cells for each group.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1096 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
formation utilizing additional neuronal-specific promoters, Nexin
(Goebbels et al., 2006) and Tau (Korets-Smith et al., 2004), to
drive Cre expression (data not shown). Analysis of neurofila-
ment-positive neurons at high resolution in vivo showed that
the majority of AC KO neurons had remained spherical and
lacked neurites, contrasting with the dense neurite network of
wild-type neurons (Figures 2D and 2E).
To test whether the in vivo defects in neuritogenesis were
caused by cell-intrinsicmechanisms, we electroporatedADF/,
cofilin flox/flox E14 embryos in utero with DNA vectors expressing
Cre recombinase and yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) or GFP.
In addition to irregular neuronal cell migration, Cre expression
resulted in reduced axon tracts and altered neuronal morpho-
genesis 4 days after electroporation (E18) (Figures 2F–2I). In
the subventricular zone (SVZ), where neurons exhibit amultipolar
AC Proteins Regulate F-Actin Content, Organization,
and Filopodia Formation
We evaluated the structure of the cytoskeleton in AC KO
neurons as the potential determinant regulating neuritogenesis
(Dehmelt et al., 2003; Dent et al., 2007; Edson et al., 1993).
AC KO brains and cultured AC KO neurons showed a striking
increase in the intensity of phalloidin staining (Figures 2B, 3A,
3B, and S3A). This increase in F-actin was also detected in
biochemical extracts of AC KO neurons (Figures 3D and 3E).
Moreover, AC KO neurons presented an abnormal F-actin distri-
bution typically with a strong F-actin staining in the center of the
soma with irregular F-actin depositions in most regions, while
some regions were devoid of F-actin. This contrasted the actin
cytoskeletal structure of wild-type neurons, which showed orga-
nized, radial actin filaments in the periphery of the cell and were
d
al
hig
at
ur
in
n
g
s
in
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formationmorphology with multiple long neurites (Barnes and Polleux,
2009) (Figure 2G), Cre-expressing neurons in the same regions
either displayed short processes or completely lacked neurites
(Figures 2F–2I).
Consistently, dissociated AC KO neurons that were plated
together with GFP-labeled wild-type neurons (Garvalov et al.,
2007) recapitulated the in vivo phenotype. While only 5.9% ±
0.7% of wild-type neurons had no neurites after 1 DIV,
62.2% ± 5.3% of AC KO neurons failed to elaborate neurites,
a 10-fold increase (p < 0.001; Figures 2J and 2K).ACKO neurons
did not experience a delayed development but rather a funda-
mental inhibition of neurite initiation as the number of AC KO
neurons without neurites did not change significantly from 1–3
DIV (Figure 2K). Long-term live-cell imaging experiments
showed that stage 1 wild-type neurons were dynamic and
extended neurites within 8 hr after plating, while AC KO neurons
were far less motile, only changing shape slowly and rarely form-
ing neurites (Figure S4A). Downregulation of ADF and Cofilin in
a neuronal cell line, N2A cells, also showed a stark decrease in
neuritogenesis, affirming the data from the genetic knockout
in primary neurons (data not shown). Together, these data
show that AC proteins are essential for neurite formation during
brain development.
(C) Quantification of the percentage of cells with filopodia in stage 1 wild-type an
group.
(D) Western blot showing G- and F-actin levels in cultured wild-type, ADFmono
(ADF+/, Cof/) and AC KO neurons.
(E) Quantification of F-/G-actin ratios from three experiments.
(F) Ratio imaging of total Cofilin to phosphorylated Cofilin reveals localization of
and active Cofilin (green) shows that the highest Cofilin activity (arrowhead) is
(G) Quantification of filopodia number per cell shows a decrease in AC KO ne
nR 120 cells for each group.
(H) Quantification of fascin/radial actin colocalization shows decreased Fasc
nR 75 cells from three experiments.
(I) Mena localization to the leading edge cell membrane is disrupted in theACKO
in stage 1 wild-type and AC KO neurons. Mena localizes to the edge of extendin
cell and accumulates in punctae away from the leading edge (white arrowhead
(J) Quantification of the percentage of cells with leading edge Mena localization
nR 80 cells for each group.(K) Fluorescent images of F-actin (phalloidin) and kabiramide (barbed ends) in sta
indicated regions. Arrowheads indicate leading edge in wild-type. Scale bar repr
(L) Quantification of the percentage of cells with leading edge kabiramide loca
experiments, nR 150 cells for each group.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Nedevoid of actin in the center (Figure 3A). AC KO neurons also
formed less filopodia (Figures 3A, 3C, and 3G). Consistent
with a role of AC proteins in filopodia dynamics, the highest level
of AC activity was observed at the base of filopodia (Figure 3F).
Furthermore, Fascin-GFP, a marker of filopodia and micro-
spikes (Cohan et al., 2001), localized to radial actin bundles in
filopodia of wild-type neurons but only showed a diffuse signal
in AC KO neurons and rarely localized to filopodia-reminiscent
structures (Figure 3H). Expression of Mena-mCherry, which
was used as a marker for the barbed ends of actin filaments
(Bear and Gertler, 2009), was localized at the cell edge in
59.3% ± 3.8% of the wild-type cells but only in 25.3% ± 5.4%
of AC KO neurons (p < 0.01; Figures 3I–3J). Consistently, rhoda-
mine-kabiramide, which binds directly to the barbed ends
of actin filaments (Petchprayoon et al., 2005), localized in
a distal-proximal gradient in wild-type cells but displayed
dispersed staining throughout the soma of the KO neurons
(Figures 3K and 3L). Taken together, these data indicate that
the barbed end orientation toward the leading edge is disrupted
in the AC KO neurons. Despite the abnormal barbed end
distribution, Abi, an essential component of the WAVE complex,
showed strong staining at the membrane of AC KO neurons
(data not shown), indicating that WAVE-Arp2/3-mediated actin
AC KO neurons. The results are from three experiments, nR 150 cells for each
lele (ADF+/, Cof/), and AC KO neurons. F-actin increases in ADFmonoallele
h AC activity. Warmer colors represent higher ratios (left). Overlay of actin (red)
the base of filopodia (right). Scale bar represents 3 mm.
ons compared to wild-type neurons. The results are from three experiments,
-positive actin bundles in AC KO neurons compared to wild-type neurons.
eurons. The fluorescentmicrographs showMena-mCherry expression patterns
protrusions (white arrowheads). In AC KOs, Mena is dispersed throughout the
). Scale bar represents 3 mm.
stage 1 wild-type and AC KO neurons. The results are from three experiments,ge 1 wild-type and AC KO neurons. The right panels are magnified views of the
esents 10 mm.
lization in stage 1 wild-type and AC KO neurons. The results are from three
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1097
Neuronnucleation can occur at the appropriate location in the absence
of AC.
High-resolution electron microscopy tomography revealed
that in wild-type stage 1 neurons, actin filaments were radially
oriented in tight bundles in filopodia or in a meshwork of fila-
ments largely oriented toward the cell edge of lamellipodial veils
(Figures 4A–4C, Movie S2). In contrast, AC KO neurons had
a disorganized dense actin filament network with a large popula-
tion of individual filaments oriented circumferentially, parallel to
the cell edge. Furthermore, there was no actin bundling
observed in AC KO neurons (Figures 4A–4C, Movie S3). Thus,
AC proteins not only regulate the F-actin quantity, but also the
configuration of the neuronal actin network.
ADF/Cofilin Proteins Are Essential for Retrograde
F-Actin Flow and Actin Turnover
The increased levels of F-actin and disordered filaments in AC
KO neurons suggested a defect in actin turnover. Therefore,
we examined actin dynamics by live-cell imaging using Lifeact-
GFP. Stage 1 wild-type neurons had a very dynamic actin
network, forming and retracting filopodia within minutes
(Figure 5A, Movie S4). In contrast, AC KO neurons had an
immobile actin network (Figure 5B, Movie S4). Kymograph
bleaching GFP-actin
KO neurons showed
recovery (t1/2) compa
and 5G).
Having found such
dynamics, we wanted
and form normal actin
expression levels in a
Cofilin to a destabiliza
for rapid proteasom
et al., 2006). Addition
from degradation and
2 hr and high express
neurons expressing D
changes in actin struc
6 hr after Cofilin-DD
neurons showed som
(Figure 5I). After 10–1
circumferential actin
actin retrograde flow
Movie S5). In accord
GFP reoriented into p
repositioned to the lea
1098 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.bar represents 100 nm.
(C) Reconstruction of actin filaments (red) and
microtubule (green) with respect to cell edge (blue)
from tomograms of regions shown in (B).
analysis showed that while wild-type
neurons had an average retrograde flow
rate of 4.46 ± 0.97 mm/min, AC KO
neurons had an average rate of 0.14 ±Figure 4. Ultrastructural Aberrations in
the Cytoskeleton of Stage 1 ADF/Cofilin
Knockout Neurons
(A) Single frames of electron tomograms showing
the ultrastructure of the cytoskeleton of wild-type
and AC KO neurons. In wild-type neurons, radially
oriented actin filaments are organized in loose
networks in lamellipodial regions (white arrow-
head) and in tight bundles in filopodia (black
arrowhead). The AC KO neuron has a denser,
disorganized actin network. Extremely dense
F-actin causes distortions in the tomograms
(white arrowhead). Looping microtubules are seen
along the cell edge (green arrowhead). Scale bar
represents 200 nm. See also Movies S2 and S3.
(B) Magnified view of the regions indicated in (A).
The arrangement of individual actin filaments are
observed in filopodia (black arrowheads) and
lamellipodia (white arrowheads). In the AC KO
neuron, dense, circumferentially oriented actin
filaments are apparent (black arrowheads). Scale
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation0.4 mm/min, a more than 30-fold reduc-
tion (p < 0.001; Figures 5A–5C). There
was a similar reduction in protrusion
frequency and distance in AC KO neu-
rons compared to wild-type neurons
(Figures 5D and 5E). Consistently, photo-
in the peripheral actin network of AC
an over 40-fold higher half-fluorescence
red to wild-type neurons (Figures 5F
severe changes in actin organization and
to test whether AC KO cells could recover
structures. To this end, we altered Cofilin
temporally controlled manner by fusing
tion domain (DD), which targets proteins
e-mediated degradation (Banaszynski
of shield reagent protected Cofilin-DD
led to detectable Cofilin expression within
ion by 8 hr (Figures 5H and S4B). AC KO
D remained quiescent and did not show
ture or dynamics (data not shown). Within
stabilization with shield reagent, AC KO
e radially oriented actin filament bundles
2 hr, AC KO neurons formed prominent
and filopodia and showed increased
resembling wild-type neurons (Figure 5I,
with this, after shield addition, Fascin-
eripheral actin bundles and VASP-GFP
ding edge (data not shown). These data
Neuronshow that the profoundly disorganized actin network in AC KO
neurons can be structured by simply bringing Cofilin back
into the system. AC is thus vital for actin organization and
retrograde flow.
Actin Destabilization Restores Neurite Formation
in AC KO Neurons
During neuritogenesis, microtubules extend in bundles out of
the neuronal sphere to form the backbone of neurites. We
hypothesized that the drastic disorganization of F-actin struc-
ture in AC KO neurons affects the microtubule organization
necessary to form neurites. Indeed, in AC KO neurons, immu-
nocytochemistry showed that single microtubules splayed
out in an irregular fashion and looped at the cell edge (data
not shown), reminiscent of the microtubules in neurons treated
with 10 nM jasplakinolide (Figure 1G). In live-cell imaging
experiments, EB3-mCherry-labeled microtubules grew out
radially from the soma into the actin-rich periphery often
along F-actin bundles, where they slowed down, paused, and
even exhibited retrograde displacements (Figures 6A–6F,
Movie S6). As a result, microtubule advance was 46% faster
in the soma compared to the actin-rich periphery in wild-type
neurons (0.32 ± 0.04 mm/s in the soma versus 0.21 ±
0.01 mm/s in the periphery, p < 0.001; Figure 6B). In AC KO
neurons, EB3-mCherry-tagged microtubules grew out in a radial
fashion from the soma into the periphery but were laterally dis-
placed at the edge of the neuron, resulting in an increased
percentage of cells with looping microtubules (Figures 6E and
6F, Movie S6). Throughout all regions of AC KO neurons,
microtubules advanced at slower, but constant, velocities
compared to wild-type neurons (0.22 ± 0.04 mm/s in the
AC KO soma, p < 0.001; Figures 6A and 6B) and largely
avoided the F-actin network (Figures 6A–6E). Importantly,
upon latrunculin B-induced depolymerization of the actin
cytoskeleton, microtubule growth increased both in the periph-
eral zone of wild-type neurons and in all regions of AC KO
neurons and resembled the growth pattern observed in the
soma of wild-type neurons, which is devoid of actin filaments
(Figures 6C and 6D).
Moreover, after actin depolymerization with latrunculin B
treatment in AC KO neurons, EB3 comets emerged from the
cell soma and grew in bundles into nascent neurites within
2–3 hr (Figure 6G). After 1 day, latrunculin B, cytochalasin D, or
the actin-severing drug swinholide increased neuritogenesis in
AC KO neurons 2-fold to 4-fold (Figures 6H and 6I). The protru-
sion of microtubules is essential for neurite formation as low
levels of the microtubule-destabilizing drug nocodazole
attenuated the neurite-restoring effects of cytochalasin D and
latrunculin B (Figure S5). Instead, manipulations that were tar-
geted either to stimulate integrin signaling or to bundle actin
filaments, which restore neurite formation in Mena/VASP/EVL
KO neurons (Dent et al., 2007), did not enable neurite formation
in AC KO neurons (Figure S6). We conclude that the drastic
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite FormationF-actin disorganization in AC KO neurons obstructs intracellular
space and misdirects microtubule growth patterns. Further-
more, a pharmacological depolymerizing activity bypasses the
need for AC proteins, allowing microtubules to coalesce and
to radially protrude to generate neurites.
NeThe Severing Activity of AC Proteins Regulates Neurite
Formation
Although in some instances the function of ADF and Cofilin are
overlapping (Hotulainen et al., 2005), ADF depolymerizes actin
filaments better than Cofilin, whereas Cofilin severs filaments
better than ADF (Bernstein and Bamburg, 2010). Therefore, we
determined the individual contributions of ADF and Cofilin to
neuritogenesis. First, we examined the development of neurons
with either monoallele ADF expression (NesCre+/, ADF+/,
cofilinflox/flox) or monoallele cofilin expression (NesCre+/,
ADF/, cofilinflox/+). ADF monoallele expression resulted in
defective neuritogenesis with a significant increase in the
percentage of cells in stage 1 (Figures S7A and S7B). In contrast,
cofilin monoallele expression conferred wild-type-like neuronal
development, with the majority of neurons in stage 2 or stage 3
(Figures S7C and S7D).
Consistently, reintroduction of ADF into AC KO neurons only
partially restored neurite formation in AC KO neurons, whereas
Cofilin reintroduction almost completely reversed the neurito-
genesis defect, resulting in cells with wild-type morphology in
cell culture (Figures 7A and 7B). Moreover, Cofilin re-expression
restored normal neuronal development in AC KO cortical slices
(Figures 7C, 7D, and S7E). Analysis of the F-actin organization
revealed that both ADF and Cofilin restored the gross organiza-
tion of actin architecture. The percentage of cells extending filo-
podia increased 2-fold in ADF or Cofilin-transfected AC KO
neurons (Figures 7E and 7F). However, kymograph analysis of
live-cell imaging of AC KO neurons cotransfected with Lifeact-
GFP revealed that only Cofilin expression increased actin retro-
grade flow to 4.0 ± 1.0 mm/min, nearly a complete rescue, while
ADF only partially increased actin retrograde flow to 2.9 ±
1.2 mm/min, a 65% rescue (Figures 7E and 7G). Thus, while
ADF and Cofilin are equally adept at stimulating filopodia forma-
tion, Cofilin has a higher propensity for driving actin retrograde
flow and neuritogenesis.
We next asked whether the increased aptitude for F-actin
severing underlies the increased effectiveness of Cofilin for
facilitating actin retrograde flow and neuritogenesis. Biochem-
ical studies have shown that when Tyr82 is mutated to Phe
(Y82F), Cofilin loses its depolymerizing activity but retains
its severing activity (Moriyama and Yahara, 1999, 2002).
Conversely, when Ser94 is mutated to Asp (S94D), Cofilin
loses its severing activity but retains its depolymerizing activity.
The introduction of the nonsevering mutant CofS94D-RFP
did not greatly alter actin organization and dynamics in AC
KO neurons, leading only to a slight increase in filopodia
(Figures 8A–8E) and in actin retrograde flow (Figures 8A and
8B, Movie S7). However, the expression of the nondepoly-
merizing mutant CofY82F-RFP, which only can sever actin fila-
ments, restored the prototypical actin architecture in AC KO
neurons, including the percentage of cells with filopodia
(Figures 8A–8E), and substantially increased actin retrograde
flow to over 50% of wild-type levels (Figures 8A and 8B, MovieS7). Concomitantly, CofY82F restored neuritogenesis in AC
KO neurons by over 2-fold, while CofS94D only marginally
increased neurite formation in AC KO neurons (Figures 8C
and 8D). Taken together, these data show that the transforma-
tion from simple spherical cells into morphologically distinct,
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1099
Figure 5. ADF/Cofilin Is Essential for Actin Retrograde Flow in Neurons
(A) Single frame from live-cell imaging series of a wild-type neuron expressing Lifeact-GFP. The kymographs show actin retrograde flow from two line
scans. Yellow arrows highlight actin translocation. The bottom panels show normal filopodial dynamics in the boxed region from the top panel. See also
Movie S4.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1100 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
elaborate neurons relies on actin retrograde flow driven by the
severing activity of AC proteins.
DISCUSSION
Our study revealed that ADF/Cofilin drives actin retrograde flow
and regulates neurite formation. The mechanism underlying
neuritogenesis entails dynamizing and restructuring F-actin,
which maneuvers radial microtubule advance and bundling.
Specifically, the severing activity of AC proteins is a key stimulant
et al., 2008; Saarikangas et al., 2010). As they grow, actin fila-
ments (Figure 8F, red) undergo molecular aging, so that the orig-
inal ATP-actin (light red subunits) becomes ADP-actin (dark red
subunits) over time and at locations distant from the membrane.
Since AC proteins (yellow spheres) bind preferentially to this
older, ADP-actin portion of filaments, actin depolymerization,
severing (Pac-Man), turnover and reorganization, is promoted
away from the leading edge. Indeed, we found that active AC
is positioned at the base of filopodia and lamellipodia, ideally
poised for dismantling F-actin. In the absence of AC proteins,
p
po
2
on
p
mb
fili
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formationfor the actin organization and retrograde flow necessary for
neuritogenesis. Together, our data define a fundamental role
for ADF/Cofilin during neuritogenesis and advance our knowl-
edge on how neurons break the neuronal sphere.
ADF/Cofilin Regulates Actin Retrograde Flow
From migrating cells to neuronal growth cones, actin retrograde
flow is an essential component in cell motility (Dent et al., 2011;
Lowery and Van Vactor, 2009; Small and Resch, 2005). It
consists of actin subunit integration at the plus end of actin
filaments at the leading edge and retrograde movement of the
filaments and their depolymerization at the minus end. However,
its precise role in regulating neuritogenesis is still unclear. More-
over, inhibition of actin-binding proteins that are thought to
be involved in retrograde flow, including myosin II, Arp 2/3, and
Ena/VASP, only moderately reduces actin retrograde flow in
neurons (Dent et al., 2007; Korobova and Svitkina, 2008;
Medeiros et al., 2006), indicating that key factors have remained
unidentified.
Here, we identified AC as a key player regulating actin retro-
grade flow. Consistently, in vitro studies revealed that the
minimal requirements for actin turnover rates reflecting the in vivo
kinetics are AC proteins together with capping protein and
formin (Michelot et al., 2007), while motor proteins or actin
crosslinking proteins are not needed. Similarly, AC proteins,
capping protein, and Arp2/3 are sufficient to recapitulate
Listeria motility in vitro (Loisel et al., 1999).
How do AC proteins help to drive actin retrograde flow and
organization? And how does this influence neurite formation
(Figures 8F and 8G)? The location of actin polymerization is
tightly regulated, occurring nearly exclusively at the leading
edge of growth cones (Forscher and Smith, 1988), probably
due to the linkage of actin nucleators to the membrane (Pak
(B) Single frame of a live-cell imaging series of an AC KO neuron. The kymogra
the lack of translocation of actin filaments. The bottom panels show a lack of filo
bar represents 10 mm.
(C) Quantification of actin retrograde flow in wild-type and AC KO neurons; nR
(D) Quantification of protrusion frequency in wild-type and AC KO neurons; nR
(E) Quantification of protrusion distance in wild-type and AC KO neurons; nR
(F) Fluorescent recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) reveals that AC KO neur
GFP-actin are shown. Asterisks show original photobleached site. Scale bar re
(G) Quantification of fluorescent recovery in wild-type and AC KO neurons; nu
(H) Western blot of hippocampal neurons expressing DD alone (control) or Coincrease in Cofilin-DD expression 2–8 hr as detected with an antibody to DD.
(I) Reactivation of Cofilin-DD by addition of shield reagent restores actin organiza
Kymographs of line scans from the indicated region of the neuron show actin re
more drastic reorganization of the actin network and increased actin retrograde
***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Neattenuated actin disassembly may lead to the congestion of
the intracellular space with actin filaments that reorient haphaz-
ardly in response to the pressure of polymerization. Hence, AC
may regulate actin organization simply by virtue of its primary
activity: increasing actin turnover. Consistent with this view,
the reintroduction of Cofilin function restored retrograde flow
and reorganized actin superstructures.
Our data further show that actin retrograde flow is driven by
Cofilin’s propensity for F-actin severing. These data are consis-
tent with current actin turnover modeling, which indicates that
the most effective way to achieve accelerated actin retrograde
flow would be to enhance actin deconstruction at the minus
end of filaments (Roland et al., 2008).
ADF/Cofilin Render the Actin Cytoskeleton Permissive
for Microtubules to Form a Neurite
Filopodia have recently been linked to neuritogenesis as they
engorge with microtubules and elongate into nascent neurites
(Dent et al., 2007). From this work and our own results, it is
plausible that these radial actin bundles are the sites where
microtubules can extend into the peripheral zone in the correct,
radial orientation, which is necessary for the consolidation
and advance of a nascent neurite (Figure 8F). AC knockout
neurons displayed a marked decrease in radially oriented actin
filaments in lamellipodia and filopodia while concomitantly
exhibiting abnormal microtubule growth patterns and looping
trajectories. Thus, the lack of this permissive actin platform
for microtubules to grow along may underlie the failure of
neuritogenesis in AC KO neurons. However, neuritogenesis is
also attenuated in situations where filopodia appear normal,
such as in ADF monoallele neurons and wild-type neurons
treated with low levels of jasplakinolide. Thus, actin dynamics
is also important for this process. One possibility is that a dense
hs show actin retrograde flow from two line scans. The yellow arrows indicate
dial dynamics in the boxed region from the top panel. See alsoMovie S4. Scale
20 cells from three experiments.
20 cells from three experiments.
0 cells from three experiments.
s have strikingly reduced actin turnover. Single frames of neurons expressing
resents 10 mm.
ers are averages of nR 20 cells.
n-DD. Time after shield addition is indicated. After shield addition, there is antion and dynamics in AC KO neurons expressing Lifeact-GFP and Cofilin-DD.
trograde flow (yellow arrows). Subtle changes in the actin occur after 6 hr and
flow occurs at 10–12 hr. See also Movie S5. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1101
Figure 6. Actin Destabilization Permits Radial Microtubule Growth and Restores Neurite Formation in AC KO Neurons
(A) Microtubule advance is slower in AC KO neurons. Single frames are shown from live-cell imaging series of neurons expressing Lifeact-GFP and
EB3-mCherry (left). Color-coded projections of EB3 over time are shown (right). White arrows indicate movement of EB3. EB3-mCherry velocities are slower in
the periphery of WT cells compared to the soma. AC KO neurons display constant but slower EB3 advance speeds in both regions of the cells. Scale bar
represents 10 mm.
(B) Quantification of the advance rates of EB3-mCherry in the soma and actin-rich periphery of WT and AC KO neurons. nR 15 cells.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1102 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
actin network simply prevents microtubules to bundle and to
protrude. In this view, microtubules may grow along radial
F-actin bundles and filopodia because they offer the path of
least resistance in the retrogradely flowing actin network. Since
there is less interweaving of actin fibers in radial actin bundles
compared to the actin network in regions of lamellipodia and
proximal actin arcs, microtubules can grow in an unimpeded
fashion. Indeed, analysis of microinjected fluorescent particles
of different molecular weights showed that the actin network
in cells can be dense enough to prevent the movement of
structures having the size of microtubules (Luby-Phelps and
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Transgenic Mice
Conditional ablation of ADF/Cofilin proteins in the nervous system was
achieved by crossing mice with genomic ADF ablation and expressing Cofilin
floxed alleles (ADF/, cofilin flox/flox) (Bellenchi et al., 2007) with mice lines ex-
pressing Cre recombinase (Cre) from the nervous system-specific promoters
(see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Histological Analysis
The heads of E17 mouse embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, 4%
sucrose in PBS or PHEM buffer and prepared for cryosectioning using stan-
nc
B
lym
cu
KO
n
e
p
3-
ite
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite FormationTaylor, 1988). Consistent with this idea, the pharmacological
destabilization of actin filaments in AC KO neurons restored
neuritogenesis. Furthermore, it also allowed the proper orienta-
tion and growth of microtubules, enabling them to protrude
through the cell rim to induce a neurite. Thus, our data suggest
that during neuritogenesis, AC proteins enable microtubule
protrusion both by dismantling dense actin structures to free
intracellular space and by helping organize parallel F-actin
bundles that facilitate radial microtubule growth and bundling
(Figure 8F). In the absence of AC proteins, the congestion
and lack of ‘‘permissive’’ F-actin bundles obstructs directed
microtubule protrusion, ultimately leading to a failure of neurito-
genesis (Figure 8G).
ADF/Cofilin and Brain Development
Our study shows that the effects of AC-mediated actin
dynamics on early brain development are of paramount impor-
tance and relevant for human brain development. For example,
the neurocognitive disorder Smith-Lemli-Optiz syndrome has
recently been linked to neurite growth defects rooted, per-
haps, in a misregulation of Cofilin activity (Jiang et al., 2010).
Furthermore, the cortical ectopias we observed in embryonic
AC KO brains resemble the cobblestone cortex of mouse
models of type II lissencephaly (Bielas et al., 2004). Our study,
along with others, highlights the importance of exploring the
role of cytoskeleton-mediated mechanisms in human brain
disorders (Heng et al., 2010). We therefore see the further
elucidation of the mechanism of microtubule-actin interactions
and the involved players during neurite growth as essential
to future studies in understanding brain development and
pathology.
(C) Actin depolymerization by latrunculin B (Lat B) increases microtubule adva
expressing Lifeact-GFP and EB3-mCherry (left). Color-coded projections of E
indicate movement of EB3. EB3-mCherry velocities are faster after actin depo
(D) Quantification of the advance rates of EB3-mCherry before and after latrun
(E) The growing ends of microtubules have increased looping trajectories in AC
andmaximum intensity projections of the different time points of EB3 over a 2mi
of EB3. The open arrowheads indicate when EB3 comets pause or move in a r
(F) Quantification of cells with looping microtubules. nR 45 cells from three ex
(G) Actin destabilization rescues neuritogenesis in AC KO neurons. Images EB
latrunculin B (Lat B). Arrowheads indicate sites of EB3 comets in growing neur(H) Actin destabilization with Lat B leads to radial microtubule growth and the form
2 DIV. Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(I) Quantification of neuronal development stages in DMSO-, Lat B-, cytochalasin
experiments at 2 DIV.
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Nedard procedures (Tahirovic et al., 2010).
In Utero Electroporation
In utero electroporation experiments were performed essentially as described
(Saito, 2006) but optimized to achieve moderate expression of transgenes in
cortical neurons.
Cortical Slice Culture and Adenovirus Transduction
Acute organotypic cortical slice culture experiments were performed essen-
tially as described (Flynn et al., 2009). We added 106–107 pfu of Cofilin-RFP
or RFP control adenovirus directly on the brain tissue at 24 hr and the tissue
was fixed and stained at 72 hr.
Neuronal Cell Culture
Primary mouse hippocampal and cortical neurons were dissected from
E16.5–E17 brains and cultured as previously described (Garvalov et al., 2007).
Live-Cell Microscopy
The DeltaVision RT (Applied Precision) setup was primarily used for live-cell
imaging of fluorescent proteins. Neurons from Lifeact-GFP transgenic mice
(Riedl et al., 2010) were used to visualize actin dynamics. In other experiments,
AC KO neurons or wild-type littermate controls were transfected with Lifeact-
GFP and/or EB3-mCherry to label the actin and growingmicrotubules, respec-
tively. Rescue experiments with Cofilin-DDwere performed on ACKO neurons
cotransfected with Lifeact-GFP and pTuner Cofilin-DD or empty pTuner
plasmid (Clontech).
Immunocytochemistry
Indirect immunofluorescence was performed under conditions optimal for
the preservation of the cytoskeleton. Neuronal cultures were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde, 4% sucrose in PHEM fixation buffer and prepared for
immunofluorescence (Witte et al., 2008).
Local Actin Destabilization and Neurite Formation
Local actin destabilization was achieved by application of a local field of
latrunculin B essentially as described (Bradke and Dotti, 1999).
e velocities. Single frames are shown from live-cell imaging series of neurons
3 before and after Lat B treatment over time are shown (right). White arrows
erization. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
lin B treatment. nR 15 cells.
neurons. Single frames of neurons expressing EB3-mCherry and Lifeact-GFP
time period are shown. Solid white arrowheads indicate anterogrademovement
trograde manner. See also Movie S6. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
eriments.
mCherry from a live-cell imaging experiment of an AC KO neuron treated with
s. Scale bar represents 20 mm.ation of neurites. Actin and bIII-tubulin staining is shown for AC KO neurons at
D (Cyto D)-, and swinholide (Swin)-treated cultures. nR 200 cells from three
uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1103
Figure 7. Cofilin Re-expression in AC KO Neurons Rescues Neuritogenesis, Filopodia Formation, and Actin Retrograde Flow
(A) Micrographs of RFP and bIII-tubulin staining in AC KO neurons at 2 DIV. Arrowheads indicate growth cones of neurites with ADF or Cofilin expression. Scale
bar represents 20 mm.
(B) Quantification of the developmental stages in wild-type + RFP-, ACKO + RFP-, AC KO + ADF-RFP-, and AC KO + cof-RFP-expressing neurons. nR 100 cells
from three experiments at 2 DIV.
(C) Maximum intensity projections of RFP signal of wild-type and AC KO neurons in cortical tissue slices. Arrowheads indicate neurites. Scale bar represents
20 mm.
(D) Quantification of the developmental stages in wild-type + RFP-, AC KO + RFP-, and AC KO + cof-RFP-expressing neurons. n R 100 cells from three
experiments at 2 DIV.
(E) Actin retrograde flow is restored by re-expression of Cofilin and, to a lesser extent, of ADF. Single frames are shown of Lifeact-GFP from live-cell imaging series
of a control wild-type neuron (RFP), a control AC KO neuron (RFP), an ADF-RFP-expressing AC KO neuron, and a Cofilin-RFP-expressing AC KO neuron.
Kymographs of the indicated line scans show the retrograde actin flow. The yellow arrows indicate the translocation of F-actin. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
(F) Quantification of the percentage of cells with filopodia in stage 1 neurons is shown. nR 95 cells from three experiments.
(G) Quantification of actin retrograde flow in wild-type, AC KO control, AC KO + ADF, and AC KO + Cofilin neurons; nR 20 cells for each condition.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
1104 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.
Figure 8. The Severing Activity of Cofilin Is More Important than Its Depolymerizing Activity and a Model of the Effects of AC Activity on
Actin and Microtubules during Neurite Formation
(A) Retrograde actin flow is moderately rescued by expression of CofY82F. Single frames are shown of Lifeact-GFP from live-cell imaging series of a CofS94D-
RFP-expressing neuron and aCofY82F-RFP-expressing neuron. Kymographs of line scans show retrograde actin flow. The yellow arrows follow the translocation
of F-actin. See also Movie S7. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation
Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1105
Electron Microscopy
The ultrastructural analysis of the actin cytoskeleton was essentially per-
formed as described (Auinger and Small, 2008) with minor modifications for
optimal preservation of the neuronal cytoskeleton.
Protein Analysis
The cortices of E16.5–E18 embryonic brains were rapidly dissected and resus-
pended in SDS lysis buffer and prepared for SDS-PAGE and western blotting.
Relative levels of filamentous and globular actin were determined using the F:G
actin kit from Cytoskeleton according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
in living cells using synthetic small molecules. Cell 126, 995–1004.
Barnes, A.P., and Polleux, F. (2009). Establishment of axon-dendrite polarity in
developing neurons. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32, 347–381.
Bear, J.E., and Gertler, F.B. (2009). Ena/VASP: towards resolving a pointed
controversy at the barbed end. J. Cell Sci. 122, 1947–1953.
Bellenchi, G.C., Gurniak, C.B., Perlas, E., Middei, S., Ammassari-Teule, M.,
andWitke, W. (2007). N-cofilin is associated with neuronal migration disorders
and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex. Genes Dev. 21, 2347–2357.
Bernstein, B.W., and Bamburg, J.R. (2010). ADF/cofilin: a functional node in
cell biology. Trends Cell Biol. 20, 187–195.
+
RF
FP
R
rm
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite Formation(B) Quantification of retrograde actin flow in wild-type, AC KO control, AC KO
condition.
(C) Micrographs of RFP and bIII-tubulin staining of AC KO neurons expressing
in a rescue of neurite formation (arrowheads). Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(D) Quantification of the developmental stages in wild-type + RFP-, AC KO + R
nR 150 cells from three experiments at 2 DIV.
(E) Quantification of the percentage of cells with filopodia in stage 1 neurons. n
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent SD.
(F) In wild-type brain, ADF/Cofilin (AC) activity directs neuritogenesis. After teSUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven figures, Supplemental Experimental
Procedures, and seven movies and can be found with this article online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.038.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are very grateful for the technical assistance of Ralf Zenke, Ireen König,
and Hans Fried. Frank Gertler, Franck Polleux, and Gerard Marriott receive
our appreciation for reagents supplied in this study. We thank Barbara Bern-
stein, Mark Hübener, Artur Kania, Claudia Laskowski, Klemens Rottner,
Michael Sixt, and Michael Stiess for helpful comments and suggestions on
the manuscript. Xiao-bing Yuan (Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences)
is gratefully acknowledged for instruction in utero electroporation techniques.
We gratefully acknowledge support from the Marie Curie Actions (K.C.F.), the
Max Planck Society (F.B), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (F.B. and
W.W.), and Austrian Science Fund (FWF to J.V.S.).
Accepted: September 25, 2012
Published: December 19, 2012
REFERENCES
Akhmanova, A., and Steinmetz, M.O. (2008). Tracking the ends: a dynamic
protein network controls the fate of microtubule tips. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 9, 309–322.
Andrianantoandro, E., and Pollard, T.D. (2006). Mechanism of actin filament
turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF/cofilin.
Mol. Cell 24, 13–23.
Arimura, N., and Kaibuchi, K. (2007). Neuronal polarity: from extracellular
signals to intracellular mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 194–205.
Auinger, S., and Small, J.V. (2008). Correlated light and electron microscopy of
the cytoskeleton. Methods Cell Biol. 88, 257–272.
Banaszynski, L.A., Chen, L.C., Maynard-Smith, L.A., Ooi, A.G., andWandless,
T.J. (2006). A rapid, reversible, and tunablemethod to regulate protein functionzone (VZ/SVZ) undergoes neurite formation. ADF/Cofilin (yellow) binds to the AD
(Pac-Man). This increases actin turnover and facilitates the radial arrangement of a
coalescence, leading to the formation of a nascent neurite.
(G) In the AC KO brain, neuritogenesis is severely attenuated due to dense and di
cortical plate.
1106 Neuron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier IncBielas, S., Higginbotham, H., Koizumi, H., Tanaka, T., and Gleeson, J.G.
(2004). Cortical neuronal migration mutants suggest separate but intersecting
pathways. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 593–618.
Bradke, F., and Dotti, C.G. (1999). The role of local actin instability in axon
formation. Science 283, 1931–1934.
Carlier, M.F., Laurent, V., Santolini, J., Melki, R., Didry, D., Xia, G.X., Hong, Y.,
Chua, N.H., and Pantaloni, D. (1997). Actin depolymerizing factor (ADF/cofilin)
enhances the rate of filament turnover: implication in actin-based motility.
J. Cell Biol. 136, 1307–1322.
Cohan, C.S., Welnhofer, E.A., Zhao, L., Matsumura, F., and Yamashiro, S.
(2001). Role of the actin bundling protein fascin in growth cone morphogen-
esis: localization in filopodia and lamellipodia. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 48,
109–120.
Conde, C., and Cáceres, A. (2009). Microtubule assembly, organization and
dynamics in axons and dendrites. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 319–332.
da Silva, J.S., and Dotti, C.G. (2002). Breaking the neuronal sphere: regulation
of the actin cytoskeleton in neuritogenesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 694–704.
Dehmelt, L., Smart, F.M., Ozer, R.S., and Halpain, S. (2003). The role of micro-
tubule-associated protein 2c in the reorganization of microtubules and lamel-
lipodia during neurite initiation. J. Neurosci. 23, 9479–9490.
Delorme, V., Machacek, M., DerMardirossian, C., Anderson, K.L., Wittmann,
T., Hanein, D., Waterman-Storer, C., Danuser, G., and Bokoch, G.M. (2007).
Cofilin activity downstream of Pak1 regulates cell protrusion efficiency by
organizing lamellipodium and lamella actin networks. Dev. Cell 13, 646–662.
Dent, E.W., Kwiatkowski, A.V., Mebane, L.M., Philippar, U., Barzik, M.,
Rubinson, D.A., Gupton, S., Van Veen, J.E., Furman, C., Zhang, J., et al.
(2007). Filopodia are required for cortical neurite initiation. Nat. Cell Biol. 9,
1347–1359.
Dent, E.W., Gupton, S.L., and Gertler, F.B. (2011). The growth cone cytoskel-
eton in axon outgrowth and guidance. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3, 3.
Dotti, C.G., Sullivan, C.A., and Banker, G.A. (1988). The establishment of
polarity by hippocampal neurons in culture. J. Neurosci. 8, 1454–1468.
Edson, K., Weisshaar, B., and Matus, A. (1993). Actin depolymerisation
induces process formation on MAP2-transfected non-neuronal cells.
Development 117, 689–700.
Endo, M., Ohashi, K., Sasaki, Y., Goshima, Y., Niwa, R., Uemura, T., and
Mizuno, K. (2003). Control of growth cone motility and morphology by LIM
CofY82F-RFP, and AC KO + CofS94D-RFP neurons; n R 20 cells for each
P, CofS94D-RFP, or CofY82F-RFP at 2 DIV. CofY82F-RFP expression results
-, AC KO + CofS94D-RFP-, and AC KO + CofY82F-RFP-expressing neurons.
90 cells from three experiments.
inal mitotic division, a newborn neuron in the ventricular zone/subventricularP-actin (dark red) portion of F-actin and promotes severing of the filaments
ctin filaments (red), which frees space for radial microtubule (green) growth and
sordered F-actin and abnormal microtubule growth. IZ, intermediate zone; CP,
.
kinase and Slingshot via phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of cofilin.
J. Neurosci. 23, 2527–2537.
Flynn, K.C., Pak, C.W., Shaw, A.E., Bradke, F., and Bamburg, J.R. (2009).
Growth cone-like waves transport actin and promote axonogenesis and
neurite branching. Dev. Neurobiol. 69, 761–779.
Forscher, P., and Smith, S.J. (1988). Actions of cytochalasins on the organiza-
tion of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone. J. Cell Biol.
107, 1505–1516.
Garvalov, B.K., Flynn, K.C., Neukirchen, D., Meyn, L., Teusch, N., Wu, X.,
Brakebusch, C., Bamburg, J.R., and Bradke, F. (2007). Cdc42 regulates cofilin
during the establishment of neuronal polarity. J. Neurosci. 27, 13117–13129.
Goebbels, S., Bormuth, I., Bode, U., Hermanson, O., Schwab, M.H., and Nave,
Medeiros, N.A., Burnette, D.T., and Forscher, P. (2006). Myosin II functions in
actin-bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 215–226.
Michelot, A., Berro, J., Guérin, C., Boujemaa-Paterski, R., Staiger, C.J.,
Martiel, J.L., and Blanchoin, L. (2007). Actin-filament stochastic dynamics
mediated by ADF/cofilin. Curr. Biol. 17, 825–833.
Moriyama, K., and Yahara, I. (1999). Two activities of cofilin, severing and
accelerating directional depolymerization of actin filaments, are affected
differentially by mutations around the actin-binding helix. EMBO J. 18,
6752–6761.
Moriyama, K., and Yahara, I. (2002). The actin-severing activity of cofilin is
exerted by the interplay of three distinct sites on cofilin and essential for cell
viability. Biochem. J. 365, 147–155.
Neuron
ADF/Cofilin Is Required for Neurite FormationK.A. (2006). Genetic targeting of principal neurons in neocortex and hippo-
campus of NEX-Cre mice. Genesis 44, 611–621.
Heng, J.I., Chariot, A., and Nguyen, L. (2010). Molecular layers underlying
cytoskeletal remodelling during cortical development. Trends Neurosci. 33,
38–47.
Hotulainen, P., Paunola, E., Vartiainen, M.K., and Lappalainen, P. (2005).
Actin-depolymerizing factor and cofilin-1 play overlapping roles in promoting
rapid F-actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells. Mol. Biol.
Cell 16, 649–664.
Jiang, X.S., Wassif, C.A., Backlund, P.S., Song, L., Holtzclaw, L.A., Li, Z.,
Yergey, A.L., and Porter, F.D. (2010). Activation of Rho GTPases in Smith-
Lemli-Opitz syndrome: pathophysiological and clinical implications. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 19, 1347–1357.
Korets-Smith, E., Lindemann, L., Tucker, K.L., Jiang, C., Kabacs, N., Belteki,
G., Haigh, J., Gertsenstein, M., and Nagy, A. (2004). Cre recombinase
specificity defined by the tau locus. Genesis 40, 131–138.
Korobova, F., and Svitkina, T. (2008). Arp2/3 complex is important for filopodia
formation, growth conemotility, and neuritogenesis in neuronal cells. Mol. Biol.
Cell 19, 1561–1574.
Kwiatkowski, A.V., Rubinson, D.A., Dent, E.W., Edward van Veen, J., Leslie,
J.D., Zhang, J., Mebane, L.M., Philippar, U., Pinheiro, E.M., Burds, A.A.,
et al. (2007). Ena/VASP Is Required for neuritogenesis in the developing cortex.
Neuron 56, 441–455.
Loisel, T.P., Boujemaa, R., Pantaloni, D., and Carlier, M.F. (1999).
Reconstitution of actin-based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure
proteins. Nature 401, 613–616.
Lowery, L.A., and Van Vactor, D. (2009). The trip of the tip: understanding the
growth cone machinery. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 332–343.
Lu, M., Witke, W., Kwiatkowski, D.J., and Kosik, K.S. (1997). Delayed retrac-
tion of filopodia in gelsolin null mice. J. Cell Biol. 138, 1279–1287.
Luby-Phelps, K., and Taylor, D.L. (1988). Subcellular compartmentalization by
local differentiation of cytoplasmic structure. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 10,
28–37.NePak, C.W., Flynn, K.C., and Bamburg, J.R. (2008). Actin-binding proteins take
the reins in growth cones. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 136–147.
Petchprayoon, C., Suwanborirux, K., Tanaka, J., Yan, Y., Sakata, T., and
Marriott, G. (2005). Fluorescent kabiramides: new probes to quantify actin
in vitro and in vivo. Bioconjug. Chem. 16, 1382–1389.
Rasband, M.N. (2010). The axon initial segment and the maintenance of
neuronal polarity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 552–562.
Riedl, J., Flynn, K.C., Raducanu, A., Gärtner, F., Beck, G., Bösl, M., Bradke, F.,
Massberg, S., Aszodi, A., Sixt, M., and Wedlich-Söldner, R. (2010). Lifeact
mice for studying F-actin dynamics. Nat. Methods 7, 168–169.
Roland, J., Berro, J., Michelot, A., Blanchoin, L., and Martiel, J.L. (2008).
Stochastic severing of actin filaments by actin depolymerizing factor/cofilin
controls the emergence of a steady dynamical regime. Biophys. J. 94, 2082–
2094.
Saarikangas, J., Zhao, H., and Lappalainen, P. (2010). Regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton-plasmamembrane interplay by phosphoinositides. Physiol. Rev.
90, 259–289.
Saito, T. (2006). In vivo electroporation in the embryonic mouse central
nervous system. Nat. Protoc. 1, 1552–1558.
Schaefer, A.W., Schoonderwoert, V.T., Ji, L., Mederios, N., Danuser, G., and
Forscher, P. (2008). Coordination of actin filament and microtubule dynamics
during neurite outgrowth. Dev. Cell 15, 146–162.
Small, J.V., and Resch, G.P. (2005). The comings and goings of actin: coupling
protrusion and retraction in cell motility. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 17, 517–523.
Stiess, M., and Bradke, F. (2011). Neuronal polarization: The cytoskeleton
leads the way. Dev. Neurobiol. 71, 430–444.
Tahirovic, S., Hellal, F., Neukirchen, D., Hindges, R., Garvalov, B.K., Flynn,
K.C., Stradal, T.E., Chrostek-Grashoff, A., Brakebusch, C., and Bradke, F.
(2010). Rac1 regulates neuronal polarization through the WAVE complex.
J. Neurosci. 30, 6930–6943.
Witte, H., Neukirchen, D., and Bradke, F. (2008). Microtubule stabilization
specifies initial neuronal polarization. J. Cell Biol. 180, 619–632.uron 76, 1091–1107, December 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 1107
