aRESEARCH ARTICLE
Expression Pattern of Nogo-A, MAG, and NgR
in Regenerating Urodele Spinal Cord
Subhra Prakash Hui,1 James R. Monaghan,2 S. Randal Voss,3 and Sukla Ghosh1*
Background: The mammalian central nervous system is incapable of substantial axon regeneration after
injury partially due to the presence of myelin-associated inhibitory molecules including Nogo-A and mye-
lin associated glycoprotein (MAG). In contrast, axolotl salamanders are capable of considerable axon
regrowth during spinal cord regeneration. Results: Here, we show that Nogo-A and MAG, and their recep-
tor, Nogo receptor (NgR), are present in the axolotl genome and are broadly expressed in the central nerv-
ous system (CNS) during development, adulthood, and importantly, during regeneration. Furthermore,
we show that Nogo-A and NgR are co-expressed in Sox2 positive neural progenitor cells. Conclusions:
These expression patterns suggest myelin-associated proteins are permissive for neural development and
regeneration in axolotls. Developmental Dynamics 242:847–860, 2013. VC 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: regeneration; axolotl; spinal cord injury (SCI); Nogo-A; Nogo receptor (NgR); myelin associated glycopro-
tein (MAG)
Key Findings:
 Myelin associated factors (MAFs) are expressed in axolotl spinal cord during development and adulthood.
 Both Nogo-A and NgR are expressed in neural progenitor cells during spinal cord regeneration.
 In contrast to mammals these MAFs are permissive for CNS development and regeneration in axolotl.
Accepted 28 March 2013
INTRODUCTION
The failure of axon regeneration in
the mammalian central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) is partly due to the pres-
ence of myelin-associated inhibitory
factors (MAFs) (Berry, 1982). The
three MAFs present in mammalian
CNS myelin are Nogo (Chen et al.,
2000; Grandpre et al., 2000; Prinjha
et al., 2000; Buchli and Schwab,
2005), myelin associated glycoprotein
(MAG) (McKerracher et al., 1994),
and oligodendrocyte-myelin glycopro-
tein (OMgp) (Kottis et al., 2002; Wang
et al., 2002). These molecules impair
neurite outgrowth in vitro and are
thought to limit axonal growth in vivo
after CNS injury (Schwab and Caroni,
1988; Caroni and Schwab, 1988)
through binding to a common recep-
tor, the Nogo-66 receptor (NgR) (Four-
nier et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2002;
Domeniconi et al., 2002; Liu et al.,
2002). Binding of MAFs to NgR indu-
ces intracellular signaling by means
of activation of the neuronal GTPase
RhoA, which regulates cytoskeletal
dynamics and axonal outgrowth
(McGee and Strittmatter, 2003;
Burridge and Wennerberg, 2004).
Due to their inhibitory properties,
MAFs and their downstream signal-
ing components are considered tar-
gets for treating CNS trauma (Buchli
and Schwab, 2005; Freund et al.,
2006). However, to gain more insight
into the therapeutic potential of
MAFs, we studied their expression
during development and injury. So
far, none of these molecules has been
cloned in axolotl and little is known
about patterns of expression and
function in this regeneration compe-
tent species. Here, we describe the
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
1Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
2Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts
3Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
Grant sponsor: Department of Science and Technology, Government of India; Grant number: SR/SO/AS-26/2004; Grant sponsor: Depart-
ment of Biotechnology, Government of India; Grant number: DBT/BT/PR13953/AAQ/03/523/2010; Grant sponsor: Kentucky Spinal Cord
and Brain Injury Research Trust; Grant sponsor: National Science Foundation.
Drs. Hui and Managhan contributed equally to this work.
*Correspondence to: Sukla Ghosh, Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, University of
Calcutta, 92 A. P. C. Road, Kolkata 2700009, India. E-mail: suklagh2010@gmail.com
DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.23976
Published online 17 April 2013 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS 242:847–860, 2013
VC 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
cloning of nogo-A and expression
analyses of Nogo-A, NgR, and MAG.
In contrast to mammals, some tele-
ost fish and amphibians can substan-
tially regenerate axons after spinal
cord injury (SCI), apparently perform-
ing this task by circumventing the in-
hibitory factors found in mammals.
Studies have shown that goldfish and
axolotl CNS myelin are permissive
substrates for mammalian axon
growth and do not induce growth cone
collapse, suggesting that fish and axo-
lotls do not express MAFs in their
CNS (Bastmeyer et al., 1991; Lang
et al., 1995; Ankerhold et al., 1998).
Recent work has demonstrated that
nogo (Shypitsyna et al., 2011), mag,
omgp (Bradford et al., 2011) and ngr
(Klinger et al., 2004) are present in
the zebrafish genome, another regen-
eration competent species capable of
axon regeneration. The mammalian
nogo gene is unique among MAFs
because it codes for a long isoform
termed Nogo-A, which contains two
axon outgrowth inhibitory domains
(Grandpre et al., 2000; Oertle et al.,
2003). Of interest, this isoform has
recently been discovered in zebrafish,
so it is not the presence or absence of
MAFs that determines regenerative
ability (Shypitsyna et al., 2011). Here,
we corroborate these results by iden-
tifying nogo, mag, omgp, and ngr in
the axolotl. We also investigated
Nogo-A, MAG, and NgR expression in
the embryonic and adult axolotl CNS,
and after SCI. We show that MAFs
and NgR are broadly expressed in the
CNS during development and regen-
eration, which suggests they may
have important functional roles
beyond inhibition of axon outgrowth.
RESULTS
Time Course Analysis of
Axonal Regrowth After Injury
To evaluate the extent of axonal regen-
eration in axolotl spinal cord, cords
were transected and tissues were col-
lected at several time points after injury
(Fig. 1). Histological staining using tri-
chrome (Fig. 1A–H) and luxol fast blue/
cresyl violet (Fig. 1I–K) showed the
presence of white matter, axonal fibers,
oligodendrocyte cell bodies, and gray
matter in uninjured (Fig. 1A,B,I) and
injured cord (Fig. 1C-H,J-K). The gray
matter was composed of a compact
layer of ependyma that surrounded the
ependymal canal (not shown), as well
as neurons located in the sub-
ependyma (Fig. 1B,I). Neurons were
identified in the gray matter by stain-
ing with the neuronal marker, NeuN
(Fig. 2D). At 3 days postinjury (dpi), red
blood cells (RBCs) were observed within
the injury site, the ependymal canal
was disrupted, and there was a sub-
stantial loss of white and gray matter
tissue (Fig. 1C). Complete spinal cord
transection was confirmed because
two separate stumps were clearly
observed in histological sections and
no spared axons were seen at 3 dpi
(Fig. 1C). The ependymal canal was
sealed in 5 dpi cords (Fig. 1E) and ep-
endymal bulb formation was observed
in 7 dpi cords, when the two separate
stumps were still recognizable (Fig.
1F,G,J). As time progressed, white and
gray matter regeneration occurred
simultaneously. Axonal regeneration
was observed at the injury epicenter
at 15 dpi (Fig. 1K,K.1), 21 dpi (Fig.
1H,H.1), and 30 dpi (data not shown),
and the regeneration of neurons was
also evident in the injury epicenter
(Fig. 1H.1,K.1). Although regeneration
was substantial, we note that the
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 1. Time course analysis of regeneration after transection injury of the adult axolotl spinal cord. Longitudinal sections of uninjured (A,B,I) and
injured (C–H,K) axolotl spinal cord after trichrome (A–H) and luxol fast blue & cresyl violet (I–K) staining, respectively. A,B,I: Uninjured cord sections
show the presence of white matter (WM) and constituent axons (white arrow), gray matter (GM) and compact ependyma (ep). C: A 3 days postinjury
(dpi) section showing transected cord with loss of tissue and infiltration of red blood cells (red arrow) at the injury epicenter (double red star). D,E: Sec-
tions of 5 dpi cord showing separated stumps at the injury epicenter (double red star) and in a subsequent section, sealing of the ependymal canal
(eps) is obvious. E.1: Same 5 dpi cord section at higher magnification showing sealed ependymal canal (eps). F: Section of 7 dpi cord shows forma-
tion of the ependymal bulb (epb). G,J: Two different sections of 7 dpi cord showing separate stumps with no axonal sparing. H,H.1: (Higher magnifica-
tion of H): Section of 21 day regenerated cord showing axonal regrowth (black arrow) and cell bodies (red arrowheads) at the injury epicenter (double
red star). K: 15 dpi cord showing regenerated axons at the injury epicenter (double red star). K.1: Higher magnification showing both regenerating
axon (black arrow) and cell bodies (red arrowheads) at the injury site. Scale bar¼ 300 mm in A–H,K, 100 mm in H.1,J, 50 mm in E.1,I,K.1.
848 HUI ET AL.
volume of white matter was less than
uninjured cords at 15, 21, and 30 dpi.
Expression of RT-97 in
Uninjured and Injured Cord
To further characterize axonal changes
after transection injury, we stained
uninjured and injured spinal cords
using an antibody, RT-97 that recog-
nizes neurofilament. In uninjured spi-
nal cords, axons were distributed
throughout the white matter (Fig.
2A,B). At 7 dpi, RT-97 expression was
observed in the white matter,
extending from the rostral and caudal
stumps into uninjured regions of the
severed cord (Fig. 2E). At 21 dpi (Fig.
2F,F.1) and 30 dpi (data not shown),
expression of RT-97 was seen within
the injury epicenter, suggesting axonal
regeneration following SCI.
Identification of NOGO-A,
MAG, OMGP, and RTN4R
To establish that axolotls have ortholo-
gous axolotl sequences for nogo, mag,
omgp, and rtn4r (gene encodes for NgR
protein); groups of overlapping
expressed sequence tags (isotigs) with
sequence identity to MAFs were col-
lected from Sal-Site (www.ambystoma.
org). Blastx searches using isotigs as
query sequences revealed high similar-
ity to presumptive human orthologs
(Supp. Table S1, which is available
online). Furthermore, reciprocal blast
searches of human MAFs to the axolotl
database identified the same isotigs,
strongly suggesting that all three
MAFs and their receptor rtn4r are
present in the axolotl.
Considering that the long Nogo-A
protein isoform has been suggested to
be absent in some lower vertebrates
(Diekmann et al., 2005), we present
additional evidence to establish that ax-
olotl nogo (axNogo) is orthologous to
amniote nogo-a. axNogowas genetically
mapped to conserved synteny block 69
on linkage group 13 (LG13) of the
Ambystoma genetic map (Voss et al.,
2011). Eleven orthologous axolotl-
chicken genes in this conserved synteny
block, including axNogo, establishes
that axNogo corresponds to amniote
nogo. Overall, the presence of nogo-a in
urodeles, anurans (Klinger et al., 2004),
and bony fish (Shypitsyna et al., 2011)
indicate that its origin dates to early-
jawed vertebrates. Clearly, it is not the
presence or absence of the MAFs in the
genomes of these animals that deter-
mines regenerative ability.
Comparison of Vertebrate
Nogo-A Protein Sequences
To gain comparative insight about
Nogo-A protein structure, we per-
formed more complete sequence
comparisons between axolotl Nogo-A
and other vertebrate Nogo-A proteins.
Protein alignments showed that the
highest similarity between vertebrate
Nogo proteins occurs within the retic-
ulon homology domain (RHD) located
at the carboxyl terminus (Fig. 3A).
The axolotl RHD is 87% similar to the
corresponding region in rat Nogo-A;
only 34% of the non-RDH sequences
are similar across the rest of the pro-
tein. The RHD contains two 34
amino acid (aa) predicted transmem-
brane domains surrounding a 66 aa
extracellular domain (Nogo-66; boxed
area in 3A) that is thought to inhibit
neurite outgrowth through binding to
Nogo receptor (Fournier et al., 2001).
The 800 aa Nogo-A specific region is
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 2. RT-97 expression in uninjured and injured cord to show axonal regrowth after injury in
adult axolotl spinal cord. Longitudinal sections of uninjured and injured cord stained with axonal
marker RT-97. A: Section of uninjured cord showing axonal distribution (white arrow) in white
matter as stained by RT-97 and counterstained with DAPI. B: A cross-section of uninjured cord
showing normal distribution of axons (white arrow) in white matter. C: Differential interference
contrast (DIC) image of B. D: Adjacent section of the same cord as in B stained with neuronal
marker NeuN to show relative position of the neurons in the gray matter (white arrowheads). E:
A 7 days post-injury (dpi) cord section showing RT-97 staining in the two stumps at the injury
epicenter (double red star). F: Section of a 21 day regenerating cord showing presence of axons
in normal part of the cord and reappearance of axonal fibers in the white matter of the injury
site (double red star). F.1: Same cord at higher magnification showing regenerated axons (yellow
arrow) in the injury site. Scale bar¼ 300 mm in A,E,F, 100 mm in B,C,D, 50 mm F.1.
EXPRESSION OF MAFS IN REGENERATING SPINAL CORD 849
more divergent with similarity rang-
ing from 32 to 36% between all verte-
brates analyzed. A highly inhibitory
region found within the rat Nogo-A
specific region termed D20 (Oertle
et al., 2003) shows higher similarity
(45%) between rat and axolotl com-
pared with the entire Nogo-A specific
region (34%) (Fig. 3B). Overall, the
regions responsible for inhibitory
properties in mammals are more
highly conserved in axolotls than the
rest of the protein, suggesting conser-
vation of function.
Expression of Nogo-A and
NgR
Expression of Nogo-A and its receptor
NgR were evaluated at the transcript
and protein levels. Reverse transcrip-
tase polymerase chain reaction (RT-
PCR) analysis showed that nogo-a
and rtn4r transcripts were abundant
in the nervous system including the
eye, brain, and spinal cord (Figs. 4A,
5A). In situ hybridization localized
nogo-a transcripts in gray matter
neurons and cells in the white matter
of the brain (Fig. 4B,C), and in the
spinal cord (Fig. 4D,E). RT-PCR also
showed that nogo-a and rtn4r tran-
script levels did not significantly
change during spinal cord regenera-
tion (Figs. 4G, 5B).
Similar results were observed at
the protein level. Immunohistochem-
istry identified Nogo-A and NgR pro-
tein in the cerebellum, tectum, (Figs.
4F,4F.1; Fig. 5C,5C.1), and spinal
cord (Figs. 4H-L, 5D-H). Western blot
analysis demonstrated that the anti-
Nogo-A and anti-NgR antibodies spe-
cifically recognized their targets and
that each protein was expressed in
uninjured tails (presumably spinal
cords) as well as tail blastemas at 7
and 15 dpi (Fig. 3D,E). Immunohisto-
chemistry was used to localize expres-
sion to white matter glia, white
matter axons, and gray matter neu-
rons of uninjured spinal cords (Figs.
4I,4I.1, Fig. 5E,5E.1; Supp. Fig. S2B)
at 3 dpi (Figs. 4J-L.2, 5F-F.2,H,H.1),
7 dpi (Fig. 5G,G.1), and 15 dpi cord
(data not shown). Specifically, Nogo-A
was present in the axons, neurons
(Fig. 4J,J.1,J.2,L; Supp. Fig. S2C),
and cells near sub-pial membranes
(Fig. 4J). To confirm neuronal
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 3. Protein alignments of tetrapod Nogo-A. A: Predicted protein sequence alignment of the highly conserved carboxyl end of Nogo-A charactistic
of all reticulon proteins. The red box indicates the Nogo-66 domain. B: Predicted protein sequence alignment of the D20 inhibitory domain located in the
Nogo-A-specific region of the protein. Black shading represents 100% homology and gray shading representing similar amino acids. The red boxes indi-
cate the known inhibitory regions within mammalian Nogo-A. C: Gel electrophoresis of the nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction prod-
uct as produced using appropriate forward and reverse primers. D–F: Western blot analysis of Nogo-A, Nogo receptor (NgR), myelin associated
glycoprotein (MAG) proteins respectively in axolotl uninjured tail and tail blastema. M¼PageRuler Broad Range Protein Ladder (Thermo Scientific, USA),
1¼ uninjured tail, 2¼ 7 day tail blastema, 3¼ 15 day tail blastema. G: GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) was used as control.
850 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 4. Expression of Nogo-A in adult axolotl brain, uninjured cord and injured cord. A: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-
PCR) of nogo-a in axolotl tissues compared with expression in adult human and X. laevis tissues. The top band is the specific nogo-a PCR prod-
uct. The bottom band is the control EF-1a PCR product. The plus (þ) and minus (–) indicate expression in humans and X. laevis modified from
Klinger et al. (2004). H, heart; B, brain; E, eye; Sp, spleen; Sk, skin; G, gill; SC, spinal cord; Lu, lung; M, muscle; Li, liver. B,B.1: Representative
antisense and sense nogo-a probe staining (black arrowhead) in the medial pallium region of axolotl brain, respectively. C,C.1: Representative anti-
sense and sense nogo-a probe staining (black arrowhead) in the section of optic tectum region of axolotl brain, respectively. Note strong staining
in the gray matter, within presumptive neurons. D: Both gray matter (black arrowhead) and white matter (red arrowhead) regions of the adult axo-
lotl spinal cord show presence of nogo-a transcript. Ventral (black arrowhead) and dorsal (green arrowhead) neurons are both nogo-a positive. A
few nogo-a positive cells in the white matter (red arrowhead) are likely oligodendrocytes. E: Presence of nogo-a transcript in an uninjured tail sec-
tion. Staining is present in neurons, with strongest staining in the location of ventral neurons (black arrowhead). F: Immunohistochemical staining
of Nogo-a antibody in a sagittal section of the midbrain, passing through the cerebellum. F.1: Same section showing Nogo-A positive neuronal
cells in higher magnification in tectum. G: RT-PCR showing relative amounts of nogo-A mRNA in uninjured and injured cord at different time points
(3, 7, 15, and 28 days post-injury [dpi]). Ef-1a was used as a reference gene. NC represents no RNA control. H: Longitudinal section of uninjured
cord stained without Nogo-A primary antibody represented as negative control. I: Immunohistochemical staining of Nogo-A in a longitudinal sec-
tion of uninjured cord. I.1: Higher magnification of the same cord where Nogo-A staining is found both in gray matter (GM) neurons (white arrow)
and white matter (WM) axons (yellow arrowhead) of the cord. J: Immunohistochemical staining of Nogo-A antibody in a 3 dpi cord section shows
many Nogo-A positive cells in the stump (thick arrow); few Nogo-A positive cells are near the sub-pial membrane (white arrowheads) in the adja-
cent part of the injury epicenter (double red star). J.1,J.2: Higher magnifications of the same 3 dpi cord showing positive staining in neurons (white
arrow) and axons (yellow arrowhead). K: A transverse section of 3 dpi cord through the region immediately adjacent to the injury epicenter, stained
with Nogo-A and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). K.1,K.2: Higher magnifications of the boxed area in same section (K) showing many Nogo-A
and GFAP colocalized cells (green arrowheads) in the sub-ependyma and few around the ependymal canal (epc, green arrow) which may resem-
ble radial glia. L: A transverse section of 3dpi cord at the stump level stained with Nogo-A and NeuN. L.1,L.2: Higher magnifications of boxed
area (L) showing many Nogo-A and NeuN colocalized cells in the gray matter (white arrow) of the cord. Note that axonal cut ends (yellow arrow-
heads) and white matter cells (yellow arrow) are Nogo-A positive. The cartoon of axolotl brain (top view) has been adapted from the Eisthen lab
(Michigan State University, USA) to show the plane of section and region of the brain as represented in sections stained with Nogo-A antibody.
Scale bar¼ 300 mm in H–J; 100 mm in K,L; 50 mm in B–F,B.1,C.1; 20 mm in F.1,I.1,J.1,J.2,K.1,L.1,L.2; 10 mm in K.2).
expression, Nogo-A was shown to
colocalize with the neuronal marker
NeuN in 3 dpi cords (Fig. 4L–L.2).
Approximately 60% of the NeuN posi-
tive cells were also Nogo-A positive,
as determined from differential
counts in 3 dpi cord sections (data not
shown). Nogo-A immunostaining also
decreased farther away from the
injury epicenter (Fig. 4J, Supp. Fig.
S2). NgR showed similar expression
patterns within 3 dpi cords, with
strong expression observed among
gray matter neurons (Fig. 5F,F.1;
Supp. Fig. S3) and white matter
axons (Fig. 5F,F.2; Supp. Fig. S3). A
population of Nogo-A positive cells
(approximately 50%) also showed
NgR staining (Supp. Fig. S6). Both
Nogo-A and NgR expression can be
observed before and after injury, cor-
roborating our RT-PCR and Western
blot data that Nogo-A and NgR are
expressed in the CNS before and dur-
ing spinal cord regeneration. Lastly,
we surprisingly found that some
Nogo-A and NgR positive cells in the
ependymal and sub-ependymal region
colocalized with the glial marker, glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; Figs.
4K–K.2, Fig. 5H,H.1); some of the
cells have morphologies consistent
with radial glia.
Expression of MAG in Adult
Axolotl Brain, and Uninjured
and Injured Spinal Cord
The expression of MAG protein was
characterized for injured and unin-
jured CNS tissues and compared with
expression patterns of other MAFs.
Western blot analysis showed that
anti-MAG antibody specifically binds
to axolotl MAG and is expressed
before and after injury (Fig. 3F).
Immunohistochemistry localized
MAG protein to axons and neurons in
the adult brain, especially at the
brain stem-spinal cord junction (Fig.
6B,B.1), as well as uninjured cords
(Fig. 6C,C.1). At 3 dpi, MAG protein
was observed in cells and axons near
the injury epicenter (Fig. 6D,D.1).
The white matter of both immediate
adjacent regions and regions distant
from the injury epicenter also showed
MAG positive axons (Supp. Fig. S4).
There were also several cells near the
sub-pial membrane of the injured
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 5. Expression of Nogo receptor (NgR) in adult axolotl brain, uninjured and injured cord. A:
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of Rtn4R and ef1a in axolotl tissues.
Sp¼ spleen, L¼ liver, H¼ heart, S¼ skin, M¼muscle, E¼ eye, B¼brain, SC¼ spinal cord. B:
RT-PCR showing relative amounts of Rtn4R mRNA in uninjured and injured cord with different
time points (3, 7, 15, and 28 days post-injury [dpi]). Ef1a was used as a reference gene. NC rep-
resents no RNA control. C: Sagittal section of forebrain through the lateral ventricle, showing im-
munohistochemical staining of NgR. C.1: In higher magnifications, the same section (C) shows
NgR positive neurons of the dorsal pallium (DP), close to the lateral ventricle (LV). D: Longitudi-
nal section of uninjured cord stained without NgR primary antibody; a negative control. E: Longi-
tudinal section of uninjured cord stained with NgR antibody. E.1: Higher magnification of the
same section (E) showing many NgR positive neuronal cells (white arrow) in the gray matter and
fewer cells (presumably oligodendrocytes) in the white matter (yellow arrow). F: Longitudinal
section of 3 dpi cord showing high level of NgR expression in the stump. Note that few cells
near the sub-pial membrane (white arrowheads) at the injury epicenter (double red star) are NgR
positive. F.1,F.2: Higher magnification of the same section (F) showing strong staining of neurons
(white arrow) and of axons (yellow arrowhead) in the injury epicenter (double red star). G: 7 dpi
cord section shows moderate staining of NgR at the stump. G.1: The same section (G) in higher
magnification. H: A transverse section through the stump of 3 dpi cord shows NgR and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining. H.1: Higher magnification of the boxed area in the same
section shows many NgR and GFAP colocalized cells (green arrowheads) in the sub-ependyma
and fewer around the ependyma. The cartoon of axolotl brain (top view) was adapted from the
Eisthen lab (Michigan State University, USA) to show the plane and region of the brain as repre-
sented in the section. Scale bar¼ 300 mm in D–G, 100 mm in H, 50 mm in C, 20 mm in
C.1,E.1,F.1,F.2,G.1,H.1.
852 HUI ET AL.
cord that were MAG positive (Fig.
6D), mirroring the staining patterns
of Nogo-A and NgR.
Expression of Nogo-A, NgR,
and MAG in Embryonic
Axolotl CNS
Because MAF expression was wide-
spread in the uninjured CNS and dur-
ing regeneration, we examined Nogo-
A, NgR, and MAG expression during
development at a time when the spi-
nal cord makes connections to
peripheral targets (stage-45; hatch-
ing) (Nieuwenhuys et al., 1998). Im-
munohistochemical analysis showed
expression of Nogo-A, NgR, and MAG
in embryonic cord in white matter,
gray matter neurons, and ependymal
cells surrounding the central canal
(Fig. 7A–I.1). Expression of all three
proteins was also detected in the lens,
retina (Fig. 7J–K,N–O,R–S), and fore-
brain neurons (Fig. 7L–M,L.1,P–
Q,P.1). RT-PCR analysis corroborated
these data, showing expression of
nogo-a from stage-36 embryos to 2-
month-old larvae (Fig. 7W). Whole-
mount in situ hybridization spatially
localized nogo-a mRNA in stage 36
and 38 embryos (Fig. 7X) to the devel-
oping brain, spinal cord, eye (Fig. 7X),
and somites, mirroring where Nogo-A
was expressed in adult tissues.
Co-expression of Nogo-A and
Sox2 in Developing and
Injured Spinal Cord
Ependymal cells lining the central
canal of the axolotl spinal cord are
thought to provide neural progenitors
during regeneration (Chernoff et al.,
2003; McHedlishvili et al., 2012). To
determine if Nogo-A is expressed in
ependymal cells, we tested for colocal-
ization of Nogo-A and Sox2, which is
expressed in neural stem/progenitor
cells across vertebrates (Graham
et al., 2003; Ferri et al., 2004). Coloc-
alization in ependymal cells was dem-
onstrated in stage-40 embryos (Fig.
8A–D); however, Nogo-A did not coloc-
alize with Sox2 in white matter. In
adult uninjured cords, a few cells
were Sox2þ around the ependyma,
although none of them colocalized
with Nogo-A (Fig. 8G). Of interest, we
found that many cells co-expressed
Nogo-A and Sox2 in the gray matter
of the adult injured cord (Fig. 8E,E.1).
Similar to Nogo-A, we found NgR and
Sox2 colocalization in the gray matter
of 3 dpi cords (Fig. 8F,F.1). However,
the number of Nogo-Aþ/Sox2þ cells
(approximately 22% of cells) was
higher than the NgRþ/Sox2þ cells
(approximately 10% of cells) at 3 dpi
(Supp. Fig. S5). Furthermore, Sox2
expression was found both in glial
and neuronal populations identified
by using GFAP and NeuN, respec-
tively (Fig. 8H–J). We also observed
colocalized Sox2 expression with
GFAP (Fig. 8H–J) in adjacent sections
of Nogo-A/Sox2 and NgR/Sox2 stained
sections. We found that some of the
Nogo-Aþ/Sox2þ and NgRþ/Sox2þ cells
also stained positively for GFAP, with
several cells displaying radial glial
morphology (Fig. 8H,I,H.1,H.2,I.1).
Radial morphology was not present in
all the GFAPþ/Sox2þ cells possibly
because GFAP positive radial glia
may lose their radial morphology af-
ter injury (Chernoff, 1996). Alterna-
tively, these GFAPþ/Sox2þ aggregated
cells may be ependymal cells that
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 6. Expression of myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG) in axolotl adult brain, uninjured
and injured cord. A: Longitudinal section of uninjured cord stained without MAG primary anti-
body; a negative control. B: Sagittal section of hindbrain through the brain stem-spinal cord
junction shows MAG staining. B.1: Same section in higher magnification showing MAG positive
axons (yellow arrowhead) and octavo-lateralis neurons (white arrow). C: Longitudinal section of
uninjured cord shows staining of MAG in gray and white matter. C.1: Higher magnification of the
same section (C) shows strong staining in white matter (WM) axons (yellow arrowhead). Note
that few gray matter (GM) cells (white arrow) are MAG positive. D: A 3 days post-injury (dpi)
cord section shows strong MAG staining in the stump tissue and few cells near the sub-pial
membrane (white arrowheads). D.1 Higher magnification shows strong staining in white matter
(WM) axons, (yellow arrowhead) and moderate staining of gray matter (GM) cells (white arrow)
close to the injury epicenter (double red star). E: A 15 dpi cord section shows weak staining of
MAG in the white matter just adjacent to the injury epicenter (double red star). E.1: Higher mag-
nification of the boxed area (E) shows staining of MAG in axon (yellow arrowhead) and white
matter cells (white arrow). The cartoon of the axolotl brain (top view) was adapted from the
Eisthen lab, (Michigan State University, USA) to show the plane and region of the brain in sec-
tion. Scale bar¼ 200 mm in A,C–E; 50 mm in B; 20 mm in B.1,C.1,D.1,E.1.
EXPRESSION OF MAFS IN REGENERATING SPINAL CORD 853
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 7.
854 HUI ET AL.
migrate towards the lesion, as was
shown in injured X. laevis spinal
cords (Gaete et al., 2012). Therefore, a
sub-population of both neurons and
ependymal cells were Sox2 positive
(Fig. 8H–J,H.1,H.2,I.1,J.1). Of inter-
est, a few sub-pial cells were also
Nogo-Aþ/Sox2þ and NgRþ/Sox2þ (Fig.
8E.3,F.2).
DISCUSSION
Identification and Expression
of Nogo-A, NgR, and MAG in
Adulthood and After Injury
In contrast to mammals, transected
spinal cord axons regenerate success-
fully following injury in the axolotl
(O’Hara et al., 1992; Chernoff, 1996;
Chernoff et al., 2003). Here, we stud-
ied axon regrowth using a transection
injury model because it produces two
clear stumps without spared axons.
Moreover, in contrast to tail amputa-
tion (e.g., McHedlishvili et al., 2007),
spinal cord transection is a less com-
plicated injury model because axons
can be studied with less interference
from other regenerating tissues.
Finally, transection injuries (as well
as crush injuries) more closely mimic
SCIs that occur in mammals and,
therefore, are better models for mam-
malian SCI. Both our histological
analysis and time course analysis of
RT-97 protein expression revealed
reconnected axons in the injury epi-
center following transection injury,
thus confirming axon regrowth in the
axolotl. We also showed that the axo-
lotl expresses MAF genes and corre-
sponding receptors that are known to
have inhibitory properties on axon
regeneration in mammals. The pres-
ence of MAFs in zebrafish and uro-
deles, animals capable of spinal cord
regeneration throughout their life,
indicates an early vertebrate origin
for MAFs that are permissive for
regeneration. We propose it is not the
presence or absence of MAFs that
explain regenerative ability. Indeed,
deletion of all three Nogo isoforms,
MAG, and OMGP does not increase
axon regeneration following SCI in
mice (Lee et al., 2010).
The expression of Nogo-A, NgR,
and MAG in the axolotl CNS, before
and after injury, was mainly in neu-
rons, axons and a few white matter
cells. This suggests that MAFs are
likely playing roles both in the unin-
jured and injured nervous system.
Indeed, Nogo-A is known to function
in the uninjured mammalian CNS as
a stabilizer of axonal and synaptic
connectivity (Park et al., 2010;
Schwab, 2010; Pernet and Schwab,
2012). Furthermore, the other MAFs
play redundant (Zheng et al., 2006;
Liu et al., 2006) and synergistic roles
(Cafferty et al., 2010) in this regard.
Our study shows that Nogo-A,
MAG, and NgR expression is broader
than white matter. Most importantly,
we observed that many NeuNþ neu-
rons express Nogo-A, as do some
GFAPþ glial cells located in the sub-
ependyma. We found both GFAPþ/
Nogo-Aþ and GFAPþ/NgRþ cells
largely in sub-ependyma, with very
few in the ependyma. Both of these
cell types may or may not show radial
glial morphology because loss of epen-
dymal glial morphology is a charac-
teristic feature of urodele and fish
cord after injury (Chernoff, 1996; Hui
et al., 2010). The predominant cell
type expressing Nogo-A and NgR in
both the brain and spinal cord was
neurons. Similar neuronal patterns of
Nogo-A and NgR expression have
been observed in the embryonic mam-
malian CNS (Huber et al., 2002).
These data suggest that Nogo-A
expression is correlated with the high
regenerative capacity of neurons and
may have a role in synaptic plasticity,
as suggested by others (Huber et al.,
2002; Hunt et al., 2002; Schwab,
2010; Peng et al., 2011). In contrast to
mammals, the expression of axolotl
MAFs is not consistent with an axo-
nal inhibitory role after SCI; expres-
sion in adult axolotl is associated
primarily with gray matter whereas
in mammals Nogo-A is primarily
localized to oligodendrocytes (Chen
et al., 2000). Analysis of effects of IN-
1 antibody generated against NI-220/
250 peptide on oligodendrocyte cul-
ture in rodent further confirm the
specific role of Nogo-A in these cells.
Furthermore, the early developing
chick CNS (E3 stage) expresses Nogo-
A primarily in neurons, followed by
high expression in axons at or near
E12 stage. Nogo-A expression is corre-
lated with generation of motor neu-
rons and axonal outgrowth in early
development well before the expres-
sion in O4 positive oligodendrocytes
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 7. Expression of Nogo-A, Nogo receptor (NgR), and myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG)
in developing axolotl CNS. Immunolocalization of Nogo-A (A–C,J–M), NgR (D–F,N–Q) and MAG
(G–I,R–U) in developing spinal cord (A–I), retina (J,K,N,O,R,S) and forebrain (L,M,P,Q,T,U) of
stage-45 axolotl embryos. A–C: Cross-section of spinal cord showing Nogo-A positive staining
in white matter (WM) and gray matter (GM). B.1,C.1: Respective higher magnifications of sec-
tions B and C shows Nogo-A staining in neurons (yellow arrowhead), axons (white arrow) and
ependymal cells (green arrowhead) around the central canal (cc). A.1: Spinal cord section
stained without Nogo-A primary antibody; a negative control (NC). D–F: Cross-section of spinal
cord showing NgR staining in gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM). E.1,F.1: Higher magnifi-
cation of sections E and F shows positive staining in neurons (yellow arrowhead) and axons
(white arrow). G–I: Cross-section of spinal cord showing MAG staining in white (WM) and gray
matter (GM). H.1,I.1: Higher magnification of sections H and I shows positive staining in neurons
(yellow arrowhead), axons (white arrow) and ependymal cell (green arrowhead). J,K: A trans-
verse section of the eye shows Nogo-A staining in lens (L), neural retina (NR) and pigmented ret-
ina (PR). L,M: A coronal section of forebrain shows many Nogo-A positive neuronal cells (yellow
arrowhead). L.1: Higher magnification of same section in L shows Nogo-A staining in neurons
(yellow arrow), colocalized with NgR as the two antibody staining was done in adjacent section
as represented in P.1. N,O: A transverse section of eye showing NgR staining in lens (L), neural
retina (NR) and pigmented retina (PR). N.1: Eye section stained without NgR primary antibody; a
negative control (NC). P,Q: A coronal section of forebrain that was adjacent to the section pre-
sented in L and M shows many NgR positive neuronal cells (yellow arrowhead). P.1: Higher
magnification of the same section (P) shows staining in neurons (yellow arrow). R,S: A trans-
verse section of eye showing MAG staining in lens (L) and neural retina (NR). Note that staining
of MAG is weaker than Nogo-A and NgR. T,U: A transverse section of forebrain showing MAG
positive cells (yellow arrowhead) in gray matter. T.1: Forebrain section stained without MAG pri-
mary antibody; a negative control (NC). V: Transverse section of spinal cord from a stage-45 ax-
olotl embryo stained without Nogo-A primary antibody. W: Expression of rtn4 (nogo-A) and ef1a
mRNA during development. Axolotl embryo stages follow Beetshcen and Gautier’s classification.
X: Whole-mount in situ hybridization of stage-38 embryos using an antisense probe against
axNogo-A. Purple staining shows the locations of nogo-A mRNA. The schematic diagram shows
where nogo-A staining was observed in the embryo. Green: central nervous system; Red: sen-
sory placodes including olfactory, visual and otic placodes; Blue: neural crest migration paths.
“cc” denotes the central canal. Scale bar¼ 50 mm in A–I,J–U,A.1,N.1,T.1, 20 mm in
B.1,C.1,E.1,F.1,H.1,I.1, 10 mm in L.1,P.1.
EXPRESSION OF MAFS IN REGENERATING SPINAL CORD 855
and, thus, suggesting a role in neuro-
nal and axon development (O’Neill
et al., 2004). A population of Nogo-A
positive cells also expresses NgR as
shown by us (Supp. Fig. S6) and
others (Huber et al., 2002; O’Neill
et al., 2004); in our study, co-expres-
sion was observed in both injured and
uninjured adult axolotl cord. This
may indicate a role for Nogo-A/NgR
signaling in developing and regener-
ating CNS.
Expression of Nogo-A, NgR,
and MAG During CNS
Development
Our study is the first to show the
expression of myelinating inhibitory
proteins and their receptors in axolotl
during embryonic life and adulthood.
We localized Nogo-A, NgR, and MAG
in the developing axolotl CNS, includ-
ing the brain, spinal cord, and eye. In
the stage-45 embryo cortex and spinal
cord, neurons (and associated axons)
and ependymal cells express all three
molecules and many express both
NgR and Nogo-A. The developing eye
also showed expression of Nogo-A,
NgR, and MAG in retina and lens.
Interestingly, Nogo-A and NgR are
expressed during mammalian CNS
development in both radial glia and in
retinal ganglion cells (O’Neill et al.,
2004; Wang et al., 2008, 2010; Petit
et al., 2011). In developing chick and
human spinal cord, both Nogo-A and
NgR are expressed early during de-
velopment and their expression levels
remain unchanged after injury at
stages permissive for regeneration
(O’Neill et al., 2004). This observation
indicates that Nogo-A likely has an
important role in development, possi-
bly to direct axons to their proper tar-
gets. In zebrafish, expression of NgR
during development is similar to
mammals and implicated in axonal
outgrowth and guidance of PNS pro-
jections (Brosamle and Halpern,
2009). Our results support findings
observed in other vertebrates, sug-
gesting that Nogo-A and NgR expres-
sion is related to neuronal and
synaptic plasticity (Huber et al., 2002;
Hunt et al., 2003; Meier et al., 2003;
Richard et al., 2005; Schwab, 2010).
Moreover, MAFs are associated with
both development and regeneration of
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 8. Immunohistochemical localization of Nogo-A and Sox2 in stage-40 axolotl embryonic spi-
nal cord, and adult uninjured and injured cord. A–D: Transverse sections of stage-40 embryonic
cord shows Nogo-A and Sox2 colocalized cells (white arrow) in the gray matter. E: A transverse
section of 3 days post-injury (dpi) cord shows many Nogo-A and Sox2 colocalized cells. E.1,E.2:
The same section (E) in higher magnification shows colocalized cells (white arrow) in the gray mat-
ter near the injury epicenter. E.3: The same section (E) in higher magnification shows a sub-pial cell
is both Nogo-A and Sox2 positive (yellow arrows). F: A transverse section of 3 dpi cord shows
many Nogo receptor (NgR) and Sox2 colocalized cells. F.1: The same section (F) in higher magnifi-
cation showing NgR and Sox2 positive cells (white arrows) in the gray matter near the injury epi-
center. F.2: Note that a sub-pial cell is also NgR and Sox2 positive (yellow arrows) in the higher
magnification of section F. G: Transverse section of uninjured cord stained with both Nogo-A and
Sox2 showing very few cells are Sox2 positive (green arrow). H,I: Transverse sections of 3 dpi
cord. Sections H and I were taken from positions adjacent to E and F, respectively, and stained
with Sox2 and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). H.1,H.2,I.1: Higher magnifications of the boxed
areas of H and I show colocalized Sox2 and GFAP positive cells (H.1 and I.1, red arrowheads) in
the gray matter of injured cord. The section in H.2 shows a Sox2 and GFAP positive cell where
Sox2 stains the nucleus (red arrowhead) and GFAP stains fibril cytoplasm (green arrowhead). I.2:
The same section (I) in higher magnification shows few sub-pial cells are both GFAP and Sox2 pos-
itive (yellow arrows). J: A transverse section of a 3dpi cord at the stump level, stained with Sox2
and NeuN. J.1: Higher magnification of the same section (J) shows few colocalized Sox2 and
NeuN positive cells (green arrowheads) in the gray matter. “cc” denotes the central canal. Scale
bar¼ 100 mm in E–J, 50 mm in A–D, 20 mm in E.1,F.1,H.1,I.1,J.1,E.3,F.2,I.2, 10 mm in E.2,H.2.
856 HUI ET AL.
CNS, suggesting that these may have
similar roles and, thus, create an em-
bryonic environment in the adult
CNS.
Nogo-A and NgR Are
Expressed in Neural
Progenitors Both in Adult
Regenerating and in
Developing Spinal Cord
The transcription factor sox2 is con-
sidered to be a pan-neural marker
during development (Wegner, 1999),
because it is widely expressed in the
prospective neuroectoderm and early
neural tube in several species includ-
ing chick, mouse, and X. laevis. At
later stages, expression becomes re-
stricted to proliferating neuroepithe-
lial cells of the ventricular layer.
Mammalian Sox2 is expressed in neu-
ral progenitor cells throughout the
developing and adult CNS and is
implicated in the maintenance of the
neural progenitor state; its loss of
function triggers cell cycle exit fol-
lowed by neuronal differentiation
(Hutton and Pevny, 2011). We
observed that Sox2 is expressed in the
uninjured adult axolotl spinal cord
predominantly in gray matter,
although at a much lower level when
compared with the regenerating spi-
nal cord. During regeneration, Sox2
positive cells were present in GFAP
expressing sub-ependyma. Similar
up-regulation of Sox2 in the epen-
dyma and sub-ependyma of the regen-
erating cord was documented in
Pleurodeles (Ferretti et al., 2001) and
X. laevis (Gaete et al., 2012) after tail
amputation. Sox2 positive neural
stem cell-like progenitors are indeed
present in the adult zebrafish cord
and their number increases after
injury (our unpublished observation).
Furthermore, adult zebrafish have
telencephalic ventricular cells of the
brain that also express Sox2 and are
neurogenic (Adolf et al., 2006).
In the adult mammalian spinal
cord, the main progenitor cells are
localized in the ependymal and sub-
ependymal layers of the central canal
ventricular zone. These cells have the
characteristics of neural stem cells
(NSC) as they express markers such
as Sox2, vimentin, GFAP, nestin, and
BLBP (Petit et al., 2011). In the
regenerating urodele cord, there are
many migrating progenitors and simi-
lar to the mammalian cord, expres-
sion of NSC markers has also been
observed (O’Hara et al., 1992; Ferretti
et al., 2001; Walder et al., 2003). The
colocalization of Nogo-A and NgR
with Sox2 both in the developing and
regenerating axolotl cord confirms
that these molecules are expressed in
neural progenitors and may partici-
pate in spinal cord repair process.
This conclusion is supported by
reports from other species showing
that Sox2 positive progenitors con-
tribute to regeneration (Lin et al.,
2009; Arnold et al., 2011; Gaete et al.,
2012). A small percentage of sub-pial
white matter cells were also positive
for both Sox2 and Nogo-A, or Sox2
and NgR. Sub-pial neurogenesis is a
known process in mouse and zebra-
fish CNS (Mueller and Wullimann,
2002; Li et al., 2009; Hui et al., 2010).
It is of interest to characterize these
sub-pial cells to address whether they
contribute to spinal cord regeneration
or not in the urodele.
EXPERIMENTAL
PROCEDURES
Axolotl Maintenance
Albino or white axolotls (Ambystoma
mexicanum) were either purchased
from the Ambystoma Genetic Stock
Center (University of Kentucky, Lex-
ington, KY) or spawned at the animal
house facility of University of Cal-
cutta. Larvae were maintained at 20–
22

C in 40% Holtfreter’s solution.
Animals measuring 6–8 cm snout to
cloaca were used to inflict spinal cord
injury.
Surgical Procedures for
Inflicting Spinal Cord Injury
to Axolotl
Animal housing and experiments
were approved by the University of
Kentucky, University of Florida, and
University of Calcutta Committees on
Animal Care and Use. Animals were
imported from the Ambystoma
Genetic Stock Center at the Univer-
sity of Kentucky as approved by
CITES permission to Dr. Sukla
Ghosh, University of Calcutta. Ani-
mals were anesthetized for 5 min in
0.02% buffered benzocaine (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO) and spinal cord transec-
tion was performed near the hind
limb level. After surgery, the wounds
were closed and animals were allowed
to recover. At least 5 spinal cord
transected animals were examined
for each time point and injury
response was further characterized
by histological analysis. Tissues were
collected at different time points fol-
lowing intra-cardial perfusion with
phosphate buffered saline and 4%
paraformaldehyde. The tissues were
further fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
overnight, processed and embedded in
paraplast or paraffin.
RNA Extraction and RT-PCR
Axolotls measuring 8–10 cm snout to
cloaca were anesthetized and spinal
cord tissue was collected 1 mm ante-
rior and posterior to the transection
site and snaps frozen in liquid nitro-
gen. RNA isolation was performed
using Rneasy columns (Qiagen) and
quantified using an Epoch spectro-
photometer (BioTek). cDNA was pro-
duced using 1 mg total RNA and the
iScript cDNA synthesis kit using Oli-
go(dT) 20 primers (Bio-Rad). Tem-
plates for PCR included cDNA
corresponding to 10 ng of total RNA
and 500 nM forward and reverse pri-
mers. PCR primers were as follows:
nogo-A forward 50-TGA TGG AAA
AAC TGG GGA GA-30 and reverse 50-
GGG GAT GTA CGG AGT CTC AA-30;
rtn4r forward 50-GCA CTC TGG CAG
GAA AAG AC-30 and reverse 50-TGG
CAG CAA CAA ACT GAG AC-30; ef-1a
forward 50-AAC ATC GTG GTC ATC
GGC CAT-30 and reverse 50-GGA GGT
GCC AGT GAT CAT GTT-30. PCR pa-
rameters for nogo-A and rtn4r were
28 cycles of 94

C for 45 sec, 55

C for
45 sec, 72

C for 45 sec, and 24 cycles
using the same parameters for ef-1a.
Five microliters of PCR product was
analyzed on a 1% agarose gel and
visualized using a FluorChem E
Imaging system (Cell Biosystems).
In Situ Hybridization
The 991 bp PCR product for nogo-A
was cloned into a Promega pGEM-T
vector by the A-tailing procedure, and
Nogo-A digoxygenin-labeled RNA
probe was produced using M13
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
EXPRESSION OF MAFS IN REGENERATING SPINAL CORD 857
forward and reverse primers and T7
or SP6 polymerase as described in the
Roche DIG-RNA labeling manual.
Tissue samples were fixed in 4% para-
formaldehyde/1PBS overnight, cryo-
protected by immersion in 10%
sucrose/1PBS and 20% sucrose/
1PBS for 1 hr each, followed by
immersion in 30% sucrose/1PBS for
3 hr to overnight. Tissues were then
mounted in OCT medium, sectioned
at 16 mm, and stored at 80C.
Hybridization was carried out at 55

C
overnight, washed, visualized with
NBT/BCIP, and sections were
mounted in Permount. Whole-mount
in situ hybridization was carried out
according to (Monaghan and Maden,
2012), which was based upon a proto-
col provided by David Parichy (Uni-
versity of Washington, USA).
Multiple embryos were observed to
confirm the expression patterns, and
tracing of expression patterns was
performed using an Intuos4 pen tab-
let (Wacom) and processed using
Adobe Illustrator 5.
Mapping of axNogo-A,
Sequence Alignment, and
Analysis
Axolotl Nogo-A sequences were depos-
ited in GenBank (accession no.
JX276741). Mapping of axNogo was
performed according to (Smith et al.,
2005) using the following primers: for-
ward 50-GAA GAC GAT GAA ACG
ACT GAG AG-30, 50-CCG CAG CGC
CAG GTG ATG GTC GAG GAA-30,
and reverse 50-GGC TTC TTC CTC
TCC TCA AAA G-30. Rattus norvegi-
cus, Mus domesticus, Homo sapiens,
Gallus gallus, and Xenopus laevis
Nogo-A sequences are obtained from
NCBI (NP_114019, NP_918943,
NP_065393, NP_989697, and
AAQ82646, respectively). Sequence
alignments were performed using
CLUSTALW and regions of sequence
similarity were shaded using BOX-
SHADE. Hydrophobic regions were
predicted using Tmpred, TMHMM
(Krogh et al., 2001).
Histology and
Immunohistochemistry
For histology of spinal cord and brain,
tissues were embedded either in par-
affin, in a mixture of poly-ethylene
glycol (PEG) and hexadecanol (9:1,
Sigma), or in O.C.T. compound (Leica,
Germany) and sectioned at 5–7 mm.
Sections were stained either with
Mallory’s trichrome stain (Humason,
1979) or with luxol fast blue & cresyl
violet (Kluver and Barrera, 1953).
Immunohistochemistry was per-
formed either in paraplast or paraffin
sections of 10 mm as described by Hui
et al. (2010). The following primary
antibodies were used: NgR (1:100)
polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Bio-
technology, USA), Nogo-A (1:50) poly-
clonal antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, USA), MAG (1:100)
polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Bio-
technology, USA), NeuN (1:400,
monoclonal antibody from Chemicon,
USA), Sox-2 (1:200, Abcam, USA),
GFAP (1: 500, DAKO, USA) and RT-
97 (1:3,000) to stain neurofilament
associated protein (gift from Dr. Ron
Meyer, USA). Details of reactivity for
the following antibodies have been
described: NeuN (McHedlishvili et al.,
2012), GFAP (O’Hara et al., 1992),
RT-97 (Hunter et al., 1991), and Sox2
(Gaete et al., 2012). Following anti-
body incubation, sections were given
several washes with either PBS
Tween-20 or 0.03% Triton X-100. Sec-
tions were then treated with the
appropriate dilution of either anti-
mouse, anti-goat, or anti-rabbit sec-
ondary antibodies coupled to fluores-
cein isothiocyanate (FITC) or
Rhodamine (Jackson laboratory,
USA), counter stained with DAPI
(40,6-diamidine-2-phenylidole-dihy-
drochloride; Roche), mounted with
Vectashield and visualized using ei-
ther an Olympus Fluorescence micro-
scope (Model- BX51) equipped with
digital cooled CCD Camera (Model-
Evolution VF Mono) and ImagePro-
Express software, or a Zeiss 510 meta
confocal microscope.
Immunoblotting
Axolotl tail blastema was collected 7
and 15 days after amputation along
with the control, unamputated tails.
Tissues were prepared in extraction
buffer (37.5 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl,
0.5% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor
cocktail) and then the resulting tissue
lysates were subjected to 7.5% sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After
electrophoresis, proteins were trans-
ferred onto nitrocellulose membranes
and subjected to Western blotting.
The Western blots were developed
with anti-NgR (1:1,000; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, USA), anti-Nogo-A
(1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
USA), and anti-MAG (1:1,000; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, USA) antibody
followed by anti-goat and anti-rabbit
alkaline phosphatase coupled second-
ary antibody (1:1,000; Jackson labora-
tory, USA). Protein bands were
visualized using NBT/BCIP as sub-
strate. PageRuler Broad Range Pro-
tein Ladder (Thermo Scientific, USA)
was used as a standard molecular
weight marker.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the
Department of Science and technology,
Ministry of Science and Technology,
Govt. of India and partly by Depart-
ment of Biotechnology, Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology, Govt. of India to
Sukla Ghosh. S. P. Hui is recipient of a
senior research fellowship from the
Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Govt. of India. The project
also used resources from the Ambys-
toma Genetic Stock Center, which is
funded by grant DBI-0951484 from
the National Science Foundation. This
work was also supported by a grant
from the Kentucky Spinal Cord and
Brain Injury Research Trust awarded
to S.R. Voss. S. P. Hui performed all
histology, Western blotting and immu-
nohistochemistry. J. R. Monaghan per-
formed mRNA expression analysis. S.
P. Hui, J. R. Monaghan, S. R. Voss, and
S. Ghosh designed the experiments. S.
P. Hui and S. Ghosh wrote the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Adolf B, Chapouton P, Lam CS, Topp S,
Tannhauser B, Strahle U, Gotz M,
Bally-Cuif L. 2006. Conserved and
acquired features of adult neurogenesis
in the zebrafish telencephalon. Dev Biol
295:278–293.
Ankerhold RC, Leppert A, Bastmeyer M,
Stuermer CA. 1998. E587 antigen is up-
regulated by gold fish oligodendrocytes
after optic nerve lesion and supports
retinal axon regeneration. Glia 23:
257–270.
Arnold K, Sarkar A, Yram MA, Polo JM,
Bronson R, Sengupta S, Seandel M,
Geijsen N, Hochedlinger K. 2011.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
858 HUI ET AL.
Sox2(þ) adult stem and progenitor cells
are important for tissue regeneration
and survival of mice. Cell Stem Cell
9:317–329.
Bastmeyer M, Beckman M, Schwab ME,
Stuermer CA. 1991. Growth of regener-
ating goldfish axons is inhibited by rat
oligodendrocytes and CNS myelin but
not by goldfish optic nerve tract
oligodendrocyte-like cells and fish CNS
myelin. J Neurosci 11:626–640.
Berry M. 1982. Post injury myelin break-
down products inhibit axonal growth: a
hypothesis to explain the failure of axo-
nal regeneration in the mammalian
central nervous system. Bibl Anat 23:
1–11.
Bradford Y, Conlin T, Dunn N, Fashena
D, Frazer K, Howe DG, Knight J, Mani
P, Martin R, Moxon SA, Paddock H,
Pich C, Ramachandran S, Ruef BJ,
Ruzicka L, Bauer Schaper H, Schaper
K, Shao X, Singer A, Sprague J,
Sprunger B, Van Slyke C, Westerfield
M. 2011. ZFIN: enhancements and
updates to the Zebrafish Model Orga-
nism Database. Nucleic Acids Res 39:
D822–D829.
Brosamle C, Halpern ME. 2009. Nogo-
Nogo receptor signalling in PNS axon
outgrowth and pathfinding. Mol Cell
Neurosci 40:401–409.
Buchli AD, Schwab ME. 2005. Inhibition
of Nogo: a key strategy to increase
regeneration, plasticity and functional
recovery of the lesioned central nervous
system. Ann Med 37:556–567.
Burridge K, Wennerberg K. 2004. Rho and
Rac take center stage. Cell 116:167–179.
Cafferty WB, Duffy P, Huebner E, Stritt-
matter SM. 2010. MAG and OMgp syn-
ergize with Nogo-A to restrict axonal
growth and neurological recovery after
spinal cord trauma. J Neurosci 30:
6825–6837.
Caroni P, Schwab ME. 1988. Two membrane
protein fractions from rat central myelin
with inhibitory properties for neurite out-
growth. J Cell Biol 106:1281–1288.
Chen MS, Huber AB, Van Der Haar ME,
Frank M, Schnell L, Spillmann AA,
Christ F, Schwab ME. 2000. Nogo-A is
a myelin-associated neurite outgrowth
inhibitor and an antigen for monoclonal
antibody IN-1. Nature 403:434–439.
Chernoff EA. 1996. Spinal cord regenera-
tion: a phenomenon unique to urodeles?
Int J Dev Biol 40:823–831.
Chernoff EA, Stocum DL, Nye HL,
Cameron JA. 2003. Urodele spinal cord
regeneration and related processes. Dev
Dyn 226:295–307.
Diekmann H, Klinger M, Oertle T, Heinz
D, Pogoda HM, Schwab ME, Stuermer
CA. 2005. Analysis of the reticulon gene
family demonstrates the absence of the
neurite growth inhibitor Nogo-A in fish.
Mol Biol Evol 22:1635–1648.
Domeniconi M, Cao Z, Spencer T, Siva-
sankaran R, Wang K, Nikulina E,
Kimura N, Cai H, Deng K, Gao Y, He
Z, Filbin M. 2002. Myelin associated
glycoprotein interacts with Nogo-66
receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth.
Neuron 35:283–290.
Ferretti P, Zhang F, Santos-Ruiz L,
Clarke JDW. 2001. FGF signalling and
blastema growth during amphibian tail
regeneration. Int J Dev Biol 45:S127–
S128.
Ferri AL, Cavallaro M, Braida D, Di Cris-
tofano A, Canta A, Vezzani A, Ottolen-
ghi S, Pandolfi PP, Sala M, DeBiasi S,
Nicolis SK. 2004. Sox2 deficiency causes
neurodegeneration and impaired neuro-
genesis in the adult mouse brain.
Development 131:3805–3819.
Fournier AE, Grandpre T, Strittmatter
SM. 2001. Identification of a receptor
mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal
regeneration. Nature 409:341–346.
Freund P, Schmidlin E, Wannier T, Bloch
J, Mir A, Schwab ME, Rouiller EM.
2006. Nogo-A specific antibody treat-
ment enhances sproutin and functional
recovery after cervical lesion in adult
primates. Nat Med 12:790–792.
Gaete M, Munoz R, Sanchez N, Tampe R,
Moreno M, Contreras EG, Lee-Liu D,
Larrain J. 2012. Spinal cord regenera-
tion in Xenopus tadpoles proceeds
through activation of Sox2 positive
cells. Neural Dev 7:13.
Graham V, Khudyakov J, Ellis P, Pevny
L. 2003. SOX2 functions to maintain
neural progenitor identity. Neuron
39:749–765.
Grandpre T, Nakamura F, Vartanian T,
Strittmatter SM. 2000. Identification of
the Nogo inhibitor of axon regeneration
as a reticulon protein. Nature 403:439–
444.
Huber AB, Weinman O, Brosamle C, Oer-
tle T, Schwab ME. 2002. Patterns of
Nogo mRNA and protein expression in
the developing and adult rat and after
CNS lesions. J Neurosci 22:3553–3567.
Hui SP, Dutta A, Ghosh S. 2010. Cellular
response after crush injury in
adult zebrafish spinal cord. Dev Dyn
239:2962–2979.
Humason GL. 1979. Animal Tissue tech-
niques. New York: WH Freeman & Co.
Hunt D, Coffin RS, Anderson PN. 2002.
The Nogo receptor, its ligands and axo-
nal regeneration in the spinal cord; a
review. J Neurocytol 31:93–120.
Hunt D, Coffin RS, Prinjha RK, Campbell
G, Anderson PN. 2003. Nogo-A expres-
sion in the intact and injured nervous
system. Mol Cell Neurosci 24:1083–
1102.
Hunter K, Maden M, Summerbell D,
Eriksson U, Holder N. 1991. Retinoic
acid stimulates neurite outgrowth in
the amphibian spinal cord. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 88:3666–3670.
Hutton SR, Pevny LH. 2011. SOX2
expression levels distinguish between
neural progenitor populations of the
developing dorsal telencephalon. Dev
Biol 352:40–47.
Klinger M, Taylor JS, Oertle T, Schwab
ME, Steurmer CAO, Diekmann H.
2004. Identification of Nogo-66 receptor
(NgR) and homologous genes in fish.
Mol Biol Evol 21:76–85.
Kluver H, Barrera E. 1953. A method for
the combined staining of cells and fibres
in the nervous system. J Neuropath
Exp Neurol 12:400–403.
Kottis V, Thibault P, Mikol D, Xiao ZC,
Zhang R, Dergham P, Braun PE. 2002.
Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein
(OMgp) is an inhibitor of neurite out-
growth. J Neurochem 82:1566–1569.
Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonn-
hammer EL. 2001. Predicting trans-
membrane protein topology with a
hidden Markov model: application to
complete genomes. J Mol Biol 305:567–
580.
Lang DM, Rubin BP, Schwab ME,
Stuermer CA. 1995. CNS myelin and
oligodendrocytes of the Xenopus spinal
cord-but not optic nerve-are nonpermis-
sive for axon growth. J Neurosci 15:99–
109.
Lee JK, Geoffroy CG, Chan AF, Tolentino
KE, Crawford MJ, Leal MA, Kang B,
Zheng B. 2010. Assessing spinal axon
regeneration and sprouting in Nogo-,
MAG-, and OMgp-deficient mice. Neu-
ron 66:663–670.
Li G, Kataoka H, Coughlin SR, Pleasure
SJ. 2009. Identification of a transient
subpial neurogenic zone in the develop-
ing dentate gyrus and its regulation by
Cxcl12 and reelin signaling. Develop-
ment 136:327–335.
Lin YP, Ouchi Y, Satoh S, Watanabe S.
2009. Sox2 plays a role in the induction
of amacrine and M€uller glial cells in
mouse retinal progenitor cells. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 50:68–74.
Liu BP, Fournier A, Grandpre T, Stritt-
matter SM. 2002. Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for
the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297:1190–
1193.
Liu BP, Cafferty WB, Budel SO, Stritt-
matter SM. 2006. Extracellular regula-
tors of axonal growth in the adult
central nervous system. Phil Trans R
Soc Lond B 361:1593–1610.
McGee AW, Strittmatter SM. 2003. The
Nogo–66 receptor: focusing myelin inhi-
bition of axon regeneration. Trends
Neurosci 26:193–198.
McHedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzerow
A, Tanaka EM. 2007. A clonal analysis
of neural progenitors during axolotl spi-
nal cord regeneration reveals evidence
for both spatially restricted and multi-
potent progenitors. Development 134:
2083–2093.
McKerracher L, David S, Jackson DL.
1994. Identification of myelin associated
glycoprotein as a major myelin-derived
inhibitor of neurite growth. Neuron
13:805–811.
McHedlishvili L, Mazurov V, Grassme
KS, Goehler K, Robl B, Tazaki A,
Roensch K, Duemmler A, Tanaka EM.
2012. Reconstitution of the central and
peripheral nervous system during sala-
mander tail regeneration. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 109:E2258–E2266.
Meier S, Brauer AU, Heimreich B,
Schwab ME, Nitsch R, Savaskan NE.
2003. Molecular analysis of Nogo
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
EXPRESSION OF MAFS IN REGENERATING SPINAL CORD 859
expression in the hippocampus during
development and following lesion and
seizure. FASEB J 17:1153–1155.
Monaghan JR, Maden M. 2012. Visualiza-
tion of retinoic acid signaling in trans-
genic axolotls during limb development
and regeneration. Dev Biol 368:63–75.
Mueller T, Wullimann MF. 2002. BrdU-,
neuroD (nrd)- and Hu-studies reveal
unusual non-ventricular neurogenesis
in the postembryonic zebrafish fore-
brain. Mech Dev 117:123–135.
Nieuwenhuys N, Donkelaar NH, Nichol-
son C. 1998. The central nervous sys-
tem of vertebrates. Vol. 2, Chapter 18.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p 1045–1115.
O’Hara CM, Egar MW, Chernoff EA.
1992. Reorganization of the ependyma
during axolotl spinal cord regeneration:
changes in intermediate filament and fi-
bronectin expression. Dev Dyn 193:103–
115.
O’Neill P, Whalley K, Ferretti P. 2004.
Nogo and Nogo-66 receptor in human
and chick: implications for development
and regeneration. Dev Dyn 231:109–
121.
Oertle T, Van Der Haar ME, Bandtlow
CE, Robeva A, Burfeind P, Buss A,
Huber AB, Simonen M, Schnell L,
Bromsale C, Kaupmann K, Vallon R,
Schwab ME. 2003. Nogo-A inhibits neu-
rite outgrowth and cell spreading with
three discrete regions. J Neurosci 23:
5393–5406.
Park KJ, Grosso CA, Aubert I, Kaplan
DR, Miller FD. 2010. p75NTR-depend-
ent, myelin-mediated axonal degenera-
tion regulates neural connectivity in
the adult brain. Nat Neurosci 13:559–
566.
Peng X, Kim J, Zhou Z, Fink DJ, Mata
M. 2011. Neuronal Nogo-A regulates
glutamate receptor subunit expression
in hippocampal neurons. J Neurochem
119:1183–1193.
Pernet V, Schwab ME. 2012. The role of
Nogo–A in axonal plasticity, regrowth
and repair. Cell Tissue Res 349:97–104.
Petit A, Sanders AD, Kennedy TE, Tet-
zlaff W, Glattfelder KJ, Dalley RA,
Puchalski RB, Jones AR, Roskams AJ.
2011. Adult spinal cord radial glia dis-
play a unique progenitor phenotype.
PLoS One 6:e24538.
Prinjha R, Moore SE, Vinson M, Blake S,
Morrow R, Christie G, Michalovich D,
Simmons DL, Walsh FS. 2000. Inhibitor
of neurite outgrowth in humans. Na-
ture 403:383–384.
Richard M, Giannetti N, Saucier D, Sac-
quet J, Jourdan F, Pellier-Monnin V.
2005. Neuronal expression of Nogo-A
mRNA and protein during neurite out-
growth in the developing rat olfacotry
system. Eur J Neurosci 22:2145–2158.
Schwab ME. 2010. Functions of Nogo pro-
teins and their receptors in the nervous
system. Nat Rev Neurosci 11:799–811.
Schwab ME, Caroni P. 1988. Oligodendro-
cytes and CNS myelin are nonpermis-
sive substrates for neurite outgrowth
and fibroblast spreading in vitro. J
Neurosci 8:2381–2393.
Shypitsyna A, Malaga-Trillo E, Reuter A,
Stuermer CA. 2011. Origin of Nogo-A
by domain shuffling in an early jawed
vertebrate. Mol Biol Evol 28:1363–1370.
Smith JJ, Putta S, Walker JA, Kump DK,
Samuels AK, Monaghan JR, Weisrock
DW, Staben C, Voss SR. 2005. Sal-Site:
integrating new and existing ambysto-
matid salamander research and infor-
mational resources. BMC Genomics
6:181.
Voss SR, Kump DK, Putta S, Pauly N,
Reynolds A, Henry RJ, Basa S, Walker
JA, Smith JJ. 2011. Origin of amphib-
ian and avian chromosomes by fission,
fusion, and retention of ancestral chro-
mosomes. Genome Res 21:1306–1312.
Walder S, Zhang F, Ferretti P. 2003. Up-
regulation of neural stem cell markers
suggests the occurrence of dedifferenti-
ation in regenerating spinal cord. Dev
Genes Evol 213:625–630.
Wang J, Chan CK, Taylor JS, Chan SO.
2008. Localization of Nogo and its re-
ceptor in the optic pathway of mouse
embryos. J Neurosci Res 86:1721–1733.
Wang J, Wang L, Zhao H, Chan SO. 2010.
Localization of an axon growth inhibi-
tory molecule Nogo and its receptor in
the spinal cord of mouse embryos.
Brain Res 1306:8–17.
Wang KC, Koprivica V, Kim JA, Sivasan-
karan R, Guo Y, Neve RL, He Z. 2002.
Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein is
a Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits
neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:941–
944.
Wegner M. 1999. From head to toes: the
multiple facets of Sox proteins. Nucleic
Acids Res 27:1409–1420.
Zheng B, Lee JK, Xie F. 2006. Genetic
mouse models for studying inhibitors of
spinal axon regeneration. Trends Neu-
rosci 29:640–646.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
860 HUI ET AL.
