f n
ag
Ha
, Y
*
ology, In
cDepartment of Neurosurgery, Southern Medical Univer
dDepartment of Biochemistry, Dalian Medical Universit
. All rights reserved.
grafted NPCs tend to differentiate predominantly into glia
rather than neurons [2]. It has been demonstrated that the
as largely due to
llowing SCI where
fate [3]. Thus, for
dimensional (3D)
ecoming increas-
an exciting regen-
nctionalization of
oteins, peptides or
antagonists could improve stem cell therapies by providing a
defined microenvironment during transplantation [4]. Stabenfeldt
et al. developed a methylcellulose scaffold functionalized with
laminin-1, which supported neuronal and oligodendrocyte differ-
entiation with minimal astrocyte differentiation of neural stem
cells [5]. More recently, Lu et al. demonstrated that neural stem cell
embedded in fibrin matrices containing growth factor cocktails
could differentiate into multiple cellular phenotypes, including
28% of neurons [6]. Despite some promising results, the work of
* Corresponding author. Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences, 398 Ruoshui Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou
215123, China. Tel.: þ86 512 62872766; fax: þ86 512 62872546.
E-mail address: jwdai@genetics.ac.cn (J. Dai).
1
Contents lists available at
Biomat
journal homepage: www.elsev
Biomaterials 34 (2013) 5107e5116These authors contributed equally to this work.neuronal differentiation of neural progenitor cells in vivo.
 2013 Elsevier Ltd
1. Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) repair has remained one of the most
challenging clinical problems. To date, clinical therapies are
largely ineffective. Over recent years, neural progenitor cells
(NPCs) are considered to be promising in cell replacement stra-
tegies given their propensity to differentiate into neurons and glia,
and to repopulate lost or damaged cells and tissues [1]. However,
any attempt at functional recovery is met with failure as the
predisposition for glial differentiation of NPCs w
the inhibitory environment in the lesion site fo
physicochemical signals are vital for proper cell
successful SCI repair, reconstruction of three-
extracellular environment for grafted cells is b
ingly attractive.
The advance in tissue engineering provides
erative strategy to engineer stem cell niche. Fu
scaffolds with bioactive factors, ECM adhesion prSpinal cord injury repair differentiation of NPCs, enhanced axon regeneration, and promoted functional recovery markedly. A
well-functionalized scaffold was constructed to improve the recovery of SCI, which could promote thea r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 26 February 2013
Accepted 25 March 2013
Available online 13 April 2013
Keywords:
Collagen scaffold
EGFR antibody functionalization
Neural progenitor cells
Neuronal differentiation
Myelin proteins0142-9612/$ e see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ltd.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.03.062sity, Guangzhou 510515, China
y, Dalian 116044, China
a b s t r a c t
The main challenge for neural progenitor cell (NPC)-mediated repair of spinal cord injury (SCI) is lack of
favorable environment to direct its differentiation towards neurons rather than glial cells. The myelin
associated inhibitors have been demonstrated to promote NPC differentiation into glial lineage. Herein,
to inhibit the downstream signaling activated by myelin associated inhibitors, cetuximab, an epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) neutralizing antibody, functionalized collagen scaffold has been developed
as a vehicle for NPC implantation. It was found that collagen-cetuximab 1 mg scaffolds enhanced
neuronal differentiation and inhibited astrocytic differentiation of NPCs exposed to myelin proteins
significantly in vitro. To test the therapeutic effect in vivo, NPCs expressing green fluorescent protein
(GFP)-embedded scaffolds have been implanted into the 4 mm-long hemisection lesion of rats. We found
that the collagen-cetuximab 5 mg scaffolds induced neuronal differentiation and decreased astrocyticaDivision of Nanobiomedicine, Suzhou Institute
bKey Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Bi-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou 215123, China
stitute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, ChinaJianwu Dai
of NanoPromotion of neuronal differentiation o
using EGFR antibody functionalized coll
injury repair
Xiaoran Li a,1, Zhifeng Xiao b,1, Jin Han b, Lei Chen b,
Xianglin Hou b, Xing Li b, Jie Sun a, Wenyong Ding d
a,b,All rights reserved.eural progenitor cells by
en scaffolds for spinal cord
nshan Xiao b, Fukai Ma c,
annan Zhao b, Bing Chen b,
SciVerse ScienceDirect
erials
ier .com/locate/biomater ia ls
als 3functionalized tissue-engineering scaffolds suitable for NPC
implantation is still in an early stage.
Accumulating evidence suggests that myelin-associated pro-
teins such as Nogo, myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG), and
oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMgp), have shown inhibi-
tory properties in SCI regeneration [7]. Our previous work has
demonstrated that myelin proteins could induce astroglial differ-
entiation of NPCs rather than neuronal differentiation [8].
Numerous studies have demonstrated that down-regulation of
Nogo recptor (NgR), the common receptor of myelin-associated
inhibitors, could promote axon regeneration [9] and induce dif-
ferentiation of grafted NPCs into neurons and oligodendrocytes
[10]. In recent years, the study on blockade of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) in central nervous system (CNS) injury repair
has been motivated by a pioneering work that the inhibition of
EGFR blocked the activities of myelin inhibitors on neurite growth
and enabled limited regeneration of optic nerve axons. They also
demonstrated the underlying signaling mechanism that trans-
activation of EGFR is the downstream of NgR activated by myelin
associated inhibitors and myelin inhibitors triggered the phos-
phorylation of EGFR in a calcium-dependent manner [11]. Our
previous study showed that addition of EGFR antibody 151IgG on
the collagen scaffold provided effective stimulation effect on axon
growth and neural regeneration in an extreme rat spinal cord injury
model [12]. Additionally, it was found that inhibition of EGFR
signaling reduced microglial inflammatory response [13] and
attenuated reactive astrogliosis [14], resulting in functional
outcome after SCI. Also, a recent study revealed that activated EGFR
blocked neuronal differentiation and promoted glial fate in NPCs
[15]. These evidences demonstrated that EGFR inhibition may be
beneficial to CNS trauma [16]. To date, despite the successful trial of
EGFR antagonists to promote axon growth and suppress astrocyte
activation, their use for NPC fate regulation has not been reported.
In this work, a new type of scaffold comprised of cetuximab, an
EGFR antagonist, functionalized porous collagen scaffold is pre-
sented. The potential of functionalized collagen scaffold to regulate
NPC differentiation was investigated in vitro in presence of myelin
proteins, and subsequently the therapeutic effect of scaffolds
embedded with NPCs expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)
was evaluated in the rat hemisection SCI model.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Fabrication of collagen and collagen-cetuximab scaffolds
Collagen (Col) scaffolds were produced by freeze-dried dispersions under acidic
conditions as the following procedure. Collagen (Zhenghai Biotechnology Ltd.,
Shandong, China) was dissolved in 0.5 M acetic acid for 8 h at 4 C, and homogenized
in a blender for 15 min, followed by neutralization with 4 M NaOH. The homogenous
solutionwas dialyzed against deionizedwater for 5 days to remove any residual salts
and then lyophilized.
For preparation of collagen-cetuximab (col-cetuximab) scaffolds, chemical
conjugation of cetuximab to collage scaffold was performed by two-step reactions
with sulfo-succinimidyl derivatives (Sulfo-SMCC) (Sigma, USA) and Traut’s Reagent
(Sigma, USA), as the following. Collagen scaffold was immersed in 2.5 mg/mL of
Traut’s Reagent in PBS with 4 mM EDTA (pH¼ 8) for 2 h at room temperature (RT). In
a separate reaction, 2.5 mg of Sulfo-SMCC was dissolved in 4 mL of PBS with 4 mM
EDTA (pH¼ 7.2), and then cetuximabwas added into the Sulfo-SMCC solutionwith a
ratio of 8:3.7 (mg/mL) followed by reaction for 1 h at RT. The collagen scaffolds treated
by Traut’s Reagent was washed with PBS for three times and incubated with the
cetuximab solution for 1 h at RT. Subsequently, the collagen scaffolds were washed
by PBS for three times, and incubated with 5% (W/V) bovine serum albumin (BSA)
(Sigma, USA) for 1 h to block remaining reaction groups.
2.2. Quantification of cetuximab by enzyme-linked immunosorbent (ELISA) assay
Cetuximab adsorbed or conjugated on scaffolds was quantified by ELISA assay.
Goat anti-mouse-alkaline phosphatase antibody was used to detect the conjugation
X. Li et al. / Biomateri5108efficiency. To quantify goat anti-mouse-alkaline phosphatase antibody, 2 mg/mL of
enzyme substrate para-nitrophenyl-phosphate (p-NPP, Ameresco, USA) in alkalinephosphatase buffer (100 mM TriseHCl; 100 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCl2, pH 9.6) was
added, and the bound proteins were quantified at 405 nm using a plate reader
(Tecan, Sunrise, Australia). The content of cetuximab was calculated according to
calibration curve.
2.3. Myelin preparation
Myelin preparation from adult rat spinal cord was produced according to pre-
vious study [17]. Briefly, the spinal cord of SpragueeDawley (SD) rats was removed
and homogenized in 0.3 M of sucrose. The suspension was layered over 0.85 M of
sucrose and centrifuged at 27,000 g for 1 h. The sample was collected from the 0.32/
0.85 M interface. The suspension and centrifugation procedures were repeated twice,
and done in ice bath. After removal of excess sucrose, the resuspened myelin was
filtered through a 0.22 mm filter (Corning, USA) to sterilize and remove any large
aggregates.
2.4. NPC culture
NPCs were cultured as previously described with slight modification [18].
Briefly, the telencephalons were dissected from SD rats, cut into 1 mm3 pieces, and
digested in 0.25% trypsin at 37 C for 40 min. Then trypsin inhibitor was added to
stop the digestion, followed by centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min. The cell suspension
was cultured in 25 cm2 tissue culture flask (Corning, USA) in serum-free DMEM/F12
medium containing 20 ng/mL bFGF (Peprotech Asia, Rehovot, Israel), 20 ng/mL EGF
(Peprotech Asia), 2% B27 (Invitrogen, GIBCO, NY, USA), 30% glucose (Sigma, USA), and
1.83 mg/mL heparin (Sigma, USA). After 7-day culture, neurospheres were enzy-
matically dissociated to single cells for the following experiments. The NPCs were
resuspened in adhesion medium containing 10% FBS and 2  106 cells were seeded
on collagen or col-cetuximab scaffolds. After 1-day culture, the adhesion medium
was removed. After wash with PBS three times, differentiation medium containing
2% B27 and myelin proteins in DMEM/F12 medium was added. For NPC differenti-
ation, collagen scaffolds functionalized with a series of dose of cetuximab were
studied including col scaffold, col-cetuximab 0.5 mg scaffold (scaffold loaded with
0.5 mg of cetuximab initially), col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold (scaffold loaded with 1 mg
of cetuximab initially), col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffold (scaffold loaded with 2 mg of
cetuximab initially).
2.5. Western blotting
After 7-day culture, the cells were collected and lysed by RIPA buffer (Sigma,
USA) supplemented with proteinase inhibitor cocktail (04693116001, Roche Applied
Science, Mannheim, Germany) for 30 min on ice after washed with PBS. The cell
lysates were harvested from the supernatant from centrifugation at 12,000 g for
30 min. After quantification by BCA assay, 20 mg of protein was separated by sodium
docecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel, and transferred to a nitrocellulose mem-
brane (GE, Amershame, Buckinghamshire, UK). The bolts were probed with indi-
cated primary antibodies, followed by secondary antibodies conjugated with HRP.
The primary antibodies used in this study included: anti-TUj1 (1:1000, 05-559,
Millipore), anti-GFAP (1:1000, MAB360, Millipore), anti-S100 (1:500, Ab4066,
Abcam), anti-b-actin (1:10,000, T5168, Sigma).
2.6. Immunocytochemistry
After 7-day culture in differentiation medium with/without myelin proteins,
NPCs cultured on the scaffolds were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, and
permeabilized by 0.08% triton X-100 for 30min. Then samples were blocked with 5%
BSA in PBS for 1 h, and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 C. After
wash with PBS three times, the samples were incubated with secondary FITC-
conjugated antibodies and Hoechst 3342 (1 mg/mL) for 30 min at 37 C. Primary
antibodies were diluted as follow: anti-TUj1 at 1:400, and anti-GFAP at 1:500. After
immunestaining, fluorescent images were taken with scanning laser confocal fluo-
rescence microscope (A1RSi, Nikon).
2.7. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization
NPCs cultured scaffolds were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde for 40 min at 4 C.
Subsequently, they were dehydrated in ethanol with a series of concentrations: 30%,
50%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, and 95% for 10 min, and 100% for 20 min. The ethanol
was extracted in 3:1, 1:1, and 1:3 mixtures of ethanol and amyl acetate for 20 min
each followed by 100% amyl acetate storage for 20min. Then the samples were dried
by super critical CO2 extraction, and coated with gold using a sputter. The images
were captured by HITACHI S-3000N SEM (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).
2.8. Spinal cord hemisection
GFPeNPCs were obtained from GFP transgenic mouse for the following use in
animal study. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with Chinese
4 (2013) 5107e5116Ministry of Public Health (CMPH) Guide and US National Institute of Health (NIH)
Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals. SD rats (200e220 g) were housed
in ventilated, humidity and temperature controlled (23e25 C) rooms with a 12 h
light/dark cycle. Standard food pellets and water were supplied. SCI was performed
as described before with slight modification [12]. Briefly, following intraperitoneal
anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital, a 2 cm midline incision was made along the
vertebrae. After resecting the laminae, the spinal dura mater was incised to expose
the spinal cord. A lateral hemisection at T13-L2 level was made by creating a 4-mm
long longitudinal cut along the midline of the cord. Right after the SCI, the scaffolds
(4-mm-long, 2-mm-diameter) were implanted into transected gap. All animals were
divided into 4 groups accepting different treatments: col scaffolds, NPC-embedded
col scaffold, NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold, NPC-embedded col-
cetuximab 5 mg scaffold (scaffold loaded with 5 mg of cetuximab initially). Then, the
surgery site was closed in layers.
2.9. Immunohistochemistry
After 4 weeks and 12 weeks, animals were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS. Spinal cords were dissected, post-fixed overnight at 4 C, and transferred to
20% sucrose (overnight at 4 C) and then 30% sucrose (72 h at 4 C). 1.5-cm-long
horizontal sections of spinal cords containing the lesion/graft site were sectioned on
a cryostat set at 20 mm thickness. The slides were fixed in acetone for 15 min at 4 C,
and then the samples were incubated in PBS containing 5% BSA with 0.1% Trition X-
100 for 1 h at RT. The samples were incubated with primary antibodies: anti-GFP
(1:200, ab290, Abcam), anti-GFAP (1:500, MAB360, Millipore), anti-MAP2 (1:200,
M9942, Sigma), anti-neurofilament (NF, 1:100, ab3966, Abcam), and anti-
synaptophysin (1:1000, MAB368, Millipore) overnight at 4 C, and then incubated
in Alexa 488 conjugated donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:500, A21206,
Invitrogen) and Alexa 594 conjugated donkey anti-mouse secondary antibody
(1:800, A21203, Invitrogen) for 1 h at RT. DAPI was used for nuclear staining.
2.10. Functional analysis
Locomotion recovery after SCI was scored in an open field according to Basso-
Beattie-Bresnahan (BBB) locomotion rating scale of 0 (complete paralysis) to 21
(normal locomotion) [19]. Animals were allowed to move freely in an open area and
comparisons were tested by Student’s test. * represented p value < 0.05, **p value
< 0.01.
3. Results
3.1. Scaffold fabrication and characterization
The collagen scaffold showed a sponge-like structure, cylindrical
shape and changeable size (Fig. 1A), suggesting that it could be an
ideal candidate to bridge across the lesion site in SCI. The collagen
scaffold was cut into disk-shaped pieces (4 mm in diameter, 1 mm
in thickness) for in vitro study. Fig. 1B shows a representative SEM
image of the collagen scaffold. The scaffold possessed lattice-like
lamellae, high porosity of 98.6% and an interconnected porous
structure with a pore size of 60e200 mm, which could provide
sufficient space for cell adherence and growth. NPCs isolated from
the telencephalons of neonatal rats proliferated and formed
floating spheres in neurosphere medium containing growth factors
(bFGF and EGF). A single-cell suspension digested by trypsin was
seeded on the scaffolds. After NPC attachment, the adhering me-
diumwith FBS was replaced. After 7 days of culture, cell growth on
the collagen scaffold was examined via fluorescein diacetate (FDA)
staining and SEM analysis. The FDA fluorescence staining (Fig. 1C)
showed that the cells adhered and grew well on the scaffold with a
high population and good distribution. The SEM analysis (Fig. 1D)
showed that the cells grew inside the pore, and spread well on the
wall. These findings indicated that the collagen scaffold was well-
suited as scaffold for NPC delivery in SCI repair.
X. Li et al. / Biomaterials 34 (2013) 5107e5116 5109the movements of hindlimb were examined and recorded for 5 min. The evaluation
was performed by two observers blinded to the treatments weekly. For the inclined
plane test, the highest degree of inclination was defined as being that at which the
rats could maintain their position for 5 s on two separate trials [20].
2.11. Statistical analysis
The Data are presented as mean  standard deviation. Multiple group com-
parisons were made using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Two-groupFig. 1. (A) Picture displayed the structure of the collagen scaffold with a diameter of 4 mm. (
of FDA staining and (D) SEM image of NPCs cultured on collagen scaffold for 7 days.3.2. EGFR antagonist functionalization
Hetero-bi-functional corss-linker Sulfo-SMCC and Traut’s Re-
agent were used to conjugate cetuximab on the collagen scaffolds
to create a functional scaffold which could specifically block EGFR.
Fig. 2A schematically illustrates the facile conjugation of EGFRB) SEM image showing the morphology of porous collagen scaffold. (C) Confocal image
als 3X. Li et al. / Biomateri5110antibody with collagen scaffold, both of which are rich in amino
groups. The cetuximab immobilized on the scaffold was detected
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. As shown in Fig. 2B, more
cetuximab was retained on the scaffolds by using covalent conju-
gation compared with that of physical adsorption, suggesting that
chemical covalent bond between collagen and antibody is sub-
stantial for antibody immobilization. Fig. 2C shows the cetuximab
binding curve on collagen scaffolds with varied loading content. It
can be seen that the amount of bound antibodies on scaffolds
increased in a dose dependent manner. The cetuximab on the
scaffold increased significantly at the first stage, and reached a
plateau when the input loading content exceeded 5 mg.
3.3. Prepared myelin proteins inhibited neuronal differentiation of
NPCs in vitro
Although transplantation of NPCs holds the promise, the
regeneration ability was limited in adult SCI largely due to the
inhibitory milieu. To mimic growth-inhibitory environment in SCI,
SCI myelin proteins were added in the culture medium for NPC
culture. Fig. 3A shows the MTT assay of NPCs with different con-
centration of myelin proteins. It was found that myelin proteins
markedly promoted the cell proliferation and the cell number was
highest at concentration of 5 mg/mL. We further assessed the effect
of myelin on NPC differentiation. Fig. 3B shows representative
Fig. 2. (A) Schematic illustration of cetuximab conjugation on colllagen scaffold by using Tr
conjugation measured by ELISA assay. (C) Cetuximab binding curve on collagen scaffold with
**P < 0.01.4 (2013) 5107e5116images of TUj-1 and GFAP immunostaining of NPCs exposed to 1, 2,
and 5 mg/mL of myelin after differentiating for 7 days. The
expression of neuron marker TUj-1 was much lower in the myelin
groups, and whereas, the expression of glia marker GFAP was
higher. Quantitative results, as shown in Fig. 3C, showed that per-
centages of TUj-1 positive cells decreased from around 37%
(without myelin) to 31% (1 mg/mL of myelin), 23% (2 mg/mL of
myelin), and 20% (5 mg/mL of myelin). Meanwhile, percentages of
GFAP positive cells increased from around 50% (without myelin) to
53% (1 mg/mL of myelin), 54% (2 mg/mL of myelin), and 57% (5 mg/mL
of myelin) (Fig. 3D). Based on the MTT and differentiation results,
myelin concentration of 5 mg/mL has been demonstrated to be
favorable for cell growth and efficient for suppressing neuronal
differentiation. Therefore, 5 mg/mL of myelin was used in the
following in vitro experiments.
3.4. Col-cetuximab scaffolds promoted neuronal differentiation and
inhibited astrocytic differentiation of NPCs in vitro
Differentiation of NPCs cultured on collagen scaffolds with a
series of dose of cetuximab was studied in the presence of 5 mg/mL
of myelin in the culture medium. Immunostaining results showed
that the expression of TUj-1, the marker of neurons, was increased
on col-cetuximab 0.5 mg scaffold and col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold,
and decreased on the col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffold, meanwhile, the
aut’s Reagent and Sulfo-SMCC. (B) Cetuximab binding ability via physical and chemical
varied loading content. The data are expressed as mean  standard deviation for n ¼ 3.
ials 3X. Li et al. / Biomaterexpression of GFAP, the marker of astrocytes, was decreased on all
col-cetuximab scaffolds (Fig. 4A). Percentages of TUj-1 positive cells
increased from around 21% (collagen scaffold alone) to 28% (col-
cetuximab 0.5 mg scaffold), and 34% (col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold),
and decreased to 18% (col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffold), indicating that
functionalization with appropriate amount of cetuximab resulted
Fig. 3. The effect of myelin on cell number and differentiation of NPCs. (A) MTT measurem
images of TUj-1þ (for neurons) and GFAPþ (for astrocytes) immunostaining of NPCs treated
Scale bar, 100 mm. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.4 (2013) 5107e5116 5111in a more neuronal population (Fig. 4B). Percentages of GFAP pos-
itive cells decreased from around 55% (collagen scaffold alone) to
53% (col-cetuximab 0.5 mg scaffold), 48% (col-cetuximab 1 mg
scaffold) and 40% (col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffold), indicating that the
col-cetuximab scaffolds inhibited the astrocytic differentiation of
NPCs (Fig. 4C). The staining results were further confirmed by
ent showed that myelin markedly promoted the cell proliferation. (B) Representative
by varied concentration of myelin for 7 days. (C) TUj-1þ and (D) GFAPþ quantification.
Fig. 4. Cetuximab-cunjugated collagen scaffold promoted neuronal differentiation and inhibited astrocytic differentiation of NPCs exposed to 5 mg/mL of myelin. (A) Representative
images of TUj-1þ and GFAPþ immunostaining of NPCs cultured on scaffolds exposed to myelin for 7 days. (B) TUj-1þ and (C) GFAPþ quantification. (D, E) Western blot analysis o
TUj-1þ, GFAPþ and S100þ of NPCs cultured on scaffolds with (D) and without (E) myelin in the culture medium. (F) and (G) quantitation of protein bands in (D) and (E) respectively
Scale bar, 100 mm. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.f
.
western blot analysis (Fig. 4D,F). In col-cetuximab scaffold groups,
GFAP expression was down-regulated gradually, with 8% and 18%
decrease in col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold group and col-cetuximab
2 mg scaffold group respectively. Similarly, S100, another marker
of astrocytes, showed significant down-regulation, with 23% and
37% decrease in col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold group and col-
cetuximab 2 mg scaffold group respectively. The consistent results
revealed a decreased astrocytic differentiation on col-cetuximab
scaffolds. Whereas, TUj-1 expression was up-regulated by 33%
and 63% for col-cetuximab 0.5 mg scaffold group and col-cetuximab
1 mg scaffold group respectively, and down-regulated by 34% for
col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffold group. It can be concluded that func-
tionalizationwith appropriate amount of cetuximabwas helpful for
neuronal differentiation. Therefore, to deeper understand the effect
of EGFR antibody on neuronal differentiation of NPCs, we examined
NPC differentiation on col-cetuximab scaffolds without the inter-
vention of myelin (Fig. 4E,G). The decreased neuronal differentia-
tion suggested that overdose of cetuximab which is above the
amount that overcomes the effect of myelin proteins would reduce
the neuronal differentiation. Taken together, collagen scaffolds
functionalized with a defined amount of cetuximab (col-cetuximab
1 mg scaffold in this work) was capable of enhancing neuronal
differentiation as well as inhibiting astrocytic differentiation of
NPCs exposed to myelin proteins.
3.5. Col-cetuximab scaffolds increased neuronal differentiation,
decreased astrocytic differentiation of implanted NPCs, and
promoted functional recovery post-SCI
Surgical procedures of SCI are shown in Fig. 5AeD. Rats were
subjected toT13-L2 spinal cord hemisection inwhich 4mmof tissue
was removed (Fig. 5A,B). Right after the injury, the lesions were
bridgedwith col scaffold, GFP-NPC embedded col scaffold, GFP-NPC
embedded col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold or GFP-NPC embedded col-
cetuximab 5 mg scaffold (Fig. 5C,D). Behavioral analysis was per-
formed to rate open-field locomotion by BBB scale. Immediately
A) T
X. Li et al. / Biomaterials 34 (2013) 5107e5116 5113Fig. 5. Surgical procedures of hemisection SCI model and behavioral outcome post-SCI. (
of scaffolds with or without NPCs. (D) The transection site filled with scaffolds. (E) Hindlim
**P < 0.01.he exposed hemi-spinal cord of rats. (B) The hemi-transection site. (C) The implantation
b locomotion: BBB scores. (F) Inclined plane results at 12 weeks post-SCI. *P < 0.05,
Porous collagen scaffold was used as vehicle for NPC and EGFR
antagonist delivery owing to its good biocompatibility, large space for
cell accommodation and well-demonstrated use in neural tissue en-
Fig. 6. Differentiation of NPCs in hemi-transection site. (A) Overview and (B) an
enlarged image of NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold group at 12 weeks post-
SCI, showing great integration and filling of the lesion site. (C) Immunostaining
(MAP2þ/GFPþ) images showing neuronal differentiation of the grafted cells. (D)
Immunostaining (GFAPþ/GFPþ) images showing astrocytic differentiation of the graf-
ted cells. (E) Neuronal and astrocytic phenotype quantification. Scale bars, (A) 500 mm,
(BeD) 50 mm. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
als 3after surgery, BBB score of every ratwas approximately 0, suggesting
that the SCI model was successful. As shown in Fig. 5E, the recovery
was improved by the intervention of scaffold plus NPCs, while the
scaffold alone group only had modest effect. At 12 weeks post-
implantation, the BBB score of NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg
scaffold group reached a level of 6.4, indicating movement about
each point of the hindlimb. Inclined plane performance was tested
for their ability to maintain body position on an inclined plane
(Fig. 5F). Consistently, the NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg
scaffold group showed statistically significant improvement.
Next, we performed immunostaining through the spinal cord
lesion to assess the NPC fate in vivo. Fig. 6A shows the overview of
transected region in NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold
group at 12 weeks post-implantation. It can be seen that the
implant almost filled the lesion cavity and integrated with host
tissue. An enlarged image, shown in Fig. 6B, confirmed the great
host tissue-implant integration. Fig. 6C and D show the double
immunostaining of MAP2/GFP, and GFAP/GFP respectively. We
found that GFP-labeled cells co-localized with the mature neuronal
marker MAP2 (microtubule associated protein 2), and astrocyte
marker GFAP, indicating that implanted NPCs could differentiate
into neurons and astrocytes in the surroundings of lesion site.
Notably, NPCs on col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffolds expressed distinct
level of MAP2, but lower level of GFAP compared with those on
collagen scaffolds. Quantitative analysis showed that percentages
of MAP2 positive cells were 13%, 14% and 25% in GFP positive NPCs
for col, col-cetuximab 1 mg, and col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffolds
treated groups respectively at 4 weeks post-SCI. The percentages of
MAP2 positive cells increased at 12 weeks post-SCI, accounting for
14%, 15% and 27% respectively. Whereas, percentages of GFAP
positive cells were 34%, 28% and 21% respectively at 4 weeks post-
SCI, and 30%, 27% and 16% respectively at 12 weeks post-SCI
(Fig. 6E). The quantitative results revealed a significant increase
in MAP2 positive mature neurons and dramatic decrease in GFAP
positive astrocytes for NPCs on the col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold
group, indicating that col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold favored neuronal
differentiation, and suppressed astrocytic differentiation. In addi-
tion to expressing mature neuronal markers, GFP-NPCs extended
axons, as demonstrated by co-labeling for the axonal marker neu-
rofilament (Fig. 7A). Therewas muchmore NF positive axons on the
col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold group than the collagen scaffold group.
Additionally, double immunofluorescent labeling for GFP and
synaptophysin suggested synapse formation between neurons
(Fig. 7B). It can be seen that col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold group
possessed more pronounced enhancement in synapse formation.
4. Discussion
Although NPCs have the potential for neuronal differentiation
in vitro, the majority of implanted NPCs differentiate into astrocytic
phenotype in the lesion site. Recently, myelin-associated proteins,
which involved in the niche for NPCs after SCI, have been demon-
strated to induce astrocytic differentiation of grafted NPCs rather
than neuronal differentiation [8]. Evidences showed that inhibition
of EGFR, downstream signaling activated by myelin associated in-
hibitors, could benefit SCI regeneration, however, little is known
about the influence of EGFR inhibition on fate decision of NPCs. In-
hibition of EGFR was recently found to induce neuronal differentia-
tion from NG2þ glial progenitors, and promote functional recovery
in mouse contusive SCI [21]. It could be of great significance to
determine whether inhibition of EGFR signaling would benefit
neuronal differentiation fromNPCs after SCI. In this study, we aimed
to fabricate a functionalized scaffold suitable for NPC transplantation
in SCI repair. Herein, cetuximab, an EGFR antibody, immobilized
X. Li et al. / Biomateri5114collagen scaffold was developed for NPC implantation in SCI repair.4 (2013) 5107e5116gineering [22e24] (Fig. 1). Cetuximab, the EGFR antagonist, which is
ame
ials 3widespreadly used in clinical practice [25]was covalently crosslinked
onto the scaffolds (Fig. 2). Covalent modification of biochemical
molecules to the scaffolds has been demonstrated to improve its
clinical therapy effectiveness due to the effective local concentration,
prolonged availability and decreased risk of high dose as compared
with the injection or mini-pump administration at the lesion [26].
SCI myelin proteins were prepared to mimic the growth-
inhibitory environment after SCI. The outcome of inhibited
neuronal differentiation and enhanced astrocytic differentiation of
Fig. 7. Representative images of GFPþ-grafted cells labeled with the (A) neurofil
X. Li et al. / BiomaterNPCs (Fig. 3) was consistent with the finding in vivo that adult spinal
cordprovidesmolecular cues for gial, but forneuronal differentiation
for NPC transplantation [27]. We then examined the NPC differen-
tiation on col-cetuximab scaffolds in presence and absence ofmyelin
proteins in vitro (Fig. 4). It was found that col-cetuximab scaffolds
decreased the astrocytic differentiation of NPCs. Meanwhile, TUj-1
antibody was used to identify the differentiated neurons in immu-
nostaining and western blotting analysis. Encouragingly, the inhibi-
ted neuronal differentiation induced by myelin proteins was
recovered partially on the scaffolds functionalized with appropriate
amount of cetuximab (col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold in this work). It
was found that on col-cetuximab 2 mg scaffolds inpresence ofmyelin
proteins, and all col-cetuximab scaffolds in absence of myelin, a
decrease in neuronal differentiation of NPCs was observed, indi-
cating that overdose of cetuximab that exceeded the amount
required for overcoming theeffect ofmyelinproteinswoulddecrease
the neuronal differentiation. EGFR signaling has been demonstrated
to play an important role in neuronal survival [28]. Therefore,
impaired EGFR signalingwhichmight cause neuron death could be a
possible reason for the reduced neuronal differentiation on col-
cetuximab 2 mg scaffold in presence of myelin proteins. From these
results, we concluded that collagen scaffold immobilized with
defined amount of cetuximab could neutralize the inhibitory activity
ofmyelin proteins, resulting in an enhanced neuronal differentiation
and decreased astrocytic differentiation in vitro.
We subsequently evaluated whether NPCs embedded on col-
cetuximab scaffolds may acquire more neuronal phenotypes in
situ, and subsequently promote functional recovery post-SCI. It was
found that the construct comprised of porous collagen scaffold,cetuximab functionalization and NPCs was effective in promoting
neural regeneration following hemisection of the rat spinal cord.
The locomotion recovery was assessed by the BBB score (Fig. 5E). It
was found that the intervention of scaffold plus NPCs could help
improve the functional outcome, but appeared not sufficient. When
combined with cetuximab functionalization on the scaffold, sig-
nificant recovery was achieved. Inclined plane results (Fig. 5F)
mirrored the BBB scoring, indicating that implantation of NPC-
embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffold could lead to the long-
nt (NFþ) and (B) synaptophysin (Synþ) at 12 weeks post-SCI. Scale bars, 50 mm.
4 (2013) 5107e5116 5115term improvement of motor function significantly.
We further sought to determine the basis for this improvement
in locomotor function. The immunostaining results showed that
NPCs on col-cetuximab 5 mg scaffolds differentiated into more
neurons and fewer astrocytes compared with that on collagen
scaffolds at 4 weeks and 12 weeks post-SCI (Fig. 6). It can be seen
that the neuronal differentiation was enhanced and astrocytic dif-
ferentiation was reduced further with longer observation. This
finding was consistent with the previous study that suppression of
the gliogenic determinants allowed the differentiation of NPCs to-
ward a neurogenic fate post CNS injury [29]. The neurons derived
from transplanted neural stem cells have been demonstrated to
restore disrupted neuronal circuitry, and contribute to functional
improvements post-SCI [30]. On the other hand, it has been
demonstrated that the reactive astrocytes could migrate towards
the injured area to constitute the glial scar after SCI and hinder
functional recovery [31]. Therefore, we can conclude that the col-
cetuximab scaffold could stimulate implanted NPC into neuronal
phenotypes rather than astrocytic phenotypes, and subsequently,
the accumulation of newly generated neurons, and attenuation of
astrocytes contributed to a better functional recovery.
Additionally, the lesion site was also stained with other
neuronal markers i.e. NF and synaptophysin (Fig. 7). Enhanced axon
generation and synapse formation were observed on the col-
cetuximab 5 mg scaffolds. The projection of NPC-derived axons
from the lesion site together with synapse formation also
contributed to the enhanced functional recovery.
Here, we demonstrated that col-cetuximab scaffolds could pro-
mote neuronal differentiation and inhibit astrocytic differentiation
als 3of NPCs exposed to myelin proteins in vitro and in vivo post-SCI. The
highly activated EGFR signaling post-SCI, which is considered as one
of gliogenic signaling for NPCs, could be significantly suppressed by
cetuximab, which released from the col-cetuximab scaffolds. Under
this circumstance, more implanted NPCs could acquire neuronal
phenotypes with the inhibition of EGFR activity.
5. Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated that cetuximab, an EGFR
antibody, functionalized collagen scaffold could rescue NPCs from
adverse effect induced by myelin proteins, direct neuronal differen-
tiation of NPCs, and eventually promote functional recovery after SCI.
When in presence of 5 mg/mL of myelin in the culture medium, the
TUj-1 expression of NPCs on the col-cetuximab 1 mg scaffold was up-
regulated by 63%, and GFAP and S100 expression were down-
regulated by 8% and 23% respectively as compared with that on
collagen scaffold. Furthermore, the therapeutic test in rathemisection
SCI model showed that the NPC-embedded col-cetuximab 5 mg
scaffold caused a wide range of positive effects, including enhanced
neuronal differentiation and decreased astrocytic differentiation of
NPCs, promoted axonal regeneration and synapse formation, and
improved functional recovery. Thus, functionalization of collagen
scaffold with well-defined amount of EGFR antibody appears a suit-
able scaffold to positively mediate NPC differentiation in SCI repair.
This engineered collagen scaffold provides a platform in which
additional stimuli canbe introduced to improve the recoveryafter SCI.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of Science
and Technology of China (2011CB965001), National Science Foun-
dation of China (81200963, 30930032) and Chinese Academy of
Sciences (KSCX2- EW-Q-24).
Abbreviations
NPC neural progenitor cell
SCI spinal cord injury
EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor
MAG myelin associated glycoprotein
OMgp oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein
NgR Nogo recptor
CNS central nervous system
p-NPP para-nitrophenyl-phosphate
SEM Scanning electron microscopy
BBB Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan
FDA fluorescein diacetate
MTT 3-(4,5-Dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-
tetrazolium bromide
NF neurofilament
References
[1] Cusimano M, Biziato D, Brambilla E, Donega M, Alfaro-Cervello C, Snider S,
et al. Transplanted neural stem/precursor cells instruct phagocytes and reduce
secondary tissue damage in the injured spinal cord. Brain 2012;135:447e60.
[2] Ronaghi M, Erceg S, Moreno-Manzano V, Stojkovic M. Challenges of stem cell
therapy for spinal cord injury: human embryonic stem cells, endogenous neural
stem cells, or induced pluripotent stem cells? Stem Cells 2010;28:93e9.
[3] Aboody K, Capela A, Niazi N, Stern JH, Temple S. Translating stem cell studies
to the clinic for CNS repair: current state of the art and the need for a rosetta
stone. Neuron 2011;70:597e613.
[4] Kim H, Cooke MJ, Shoichet MS. Creating permissive microenvironments for
X. Li et al. / Biomateri5116stem cell transplantation into the central nervous system. Trends Biotechnol
2012;30:55e63.[5] Stabenfeldt SE, Munglani G, García AJ, LaPlaca MC. Biomimetic microenvi-
ronment modulates neural stem cell survival, migration, and differentiation.
Tissue Eng Part A 2010;16:3747e58.
[6] Lu P, Wang Y, Graham L, McHale K, Gao M, Wu D, et al. Long-distance growth
and connectivity of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord injury. Cell
2012;150:1264e73.
[7] Akbik F, Cafferty WBJ, Strittmatter SM. Myelin associated inhibitors: a link
between injury-induced and experience-dependent plasticity. Exp Neurol
2012;235:43e52.
[8] Wang B, Xiao Z, Chen B, Han J, Gao Y, Zhang J, et al. Nogo-66 promotes the
differentiation of neural progenitors into astroglial lineage cells through
mTOR-STAT3 pathway. PLoS One 2008;3:e1856.
[9] Wang T, Wang J, Yin C, Liu R, Zhang JH, Qin X. Down-regulation of Nogo re-
ceptor promotes functional recovery by enhancing axonal connectivity after
experimental stroke in rats. Brain Res 2010;1360:147e58.
[10] Xu CJ, Xu L, Huang LD, Li Y, Yu PP, Hang Q, et al. Combined NgR vaccination
and neural stem cell transplantation promote functional recovery after spinal
cord injury in adult rats. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2011;37:135e55.
[11] Koprivica V, Cho KS, Park JB, Yiu G, Atwal J, Gore B, et al. EGFR activation
mediates inhibition of axon regeneration by myelin and chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycans. Science 2005;310:106e10.
[12] Han Q, Jin W, Xiao Z, Ni H, Wang J, Kong J, et al. The promotion of neural
regeneration in an extreme rat spinal cord injury model using a collagen
scaffold containing a collagen binding neuroprotective protein and an EGFR
neutralizing antibody. Biomaterials 2010;31:9212e20.
[13] Qu W, Tian D, Guo Z, Fang J, Zhang Q, Yu Z, et al. Inhibition of EGFR/
MAPK signaling reduces microglial inflammatory response and the asso-
ciated secondary damage in rats after spinal cord injury. J Neuroinflamm
2012;9:178.
[14] Li ZW, Tang RH, Zhang JP, Tang ZP, Qu WS, Zhu WH, et al. Inhibiting
epidermal growth factor receptor attenuates reactive astrogliosis and im-
proves functional outcome after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurochem Int
2011;58:812e9.
[15] Ayuso-Sacido A, Moliterno JA, Kratovac S, Kapoor GS, O’Rourke DM,
Holland EC, et al. Activated EGFR signaling increases proliferation, survival,
and migration and blocks neuronal differentiation in post-natal neural stem
cells. J Neuro-Oncol 2010;97:323e37.
[16] Berry M, Ahmed Z, Douglas MR, Logan A. Epidermal growth factor receptor
antagonists and CNS axon regeneration: mechanisms and controversies. Brain
Res Bull 2011;84:289e99.
[17] Norton WT, Poduslo SE. Myelination in rat brain: method of myelin isolation.
J Neurochem 1973;21:749e57.
[18] Han J, Xiao Z, Chen L, Chen B, Li X, Han S, et al. Maintenance of the self-
renewal properties of neural progenitor cells cultured in three-dimensional
collagen scaffolds by the REDD1-mTOR signal pathway. Biomaterials
2013;34:1921e8.
[19] Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating
scale for open field testing in rats. J Neurotrauma 1995;12:1e21.
[20] Rivlin AS, Tator CH. Objective clinical assessment of motor function after
experimental spinal cord injury in the rat. J Neurosurg 1977;47:577e81.
[21] Ju P, Zhang S, Yeap Y, Feng Z. Induction of neuronal phenotypes from NG2þ
glial progenitors by inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor in mouse
spinal cord injury. Glia 2012;60:1801e14.
[22] Davidenko N, Gibb T, Schuster C, Best SM, Campbell JJ, Watson CJ, et al. Bio-
mimetic collagen scaffolds with anisotropic pore architecture. Acta Biomater
2012;8:667e76.
[23] Yu H, Cao B, Feng M, Zhou Q, Sun X, Wu S, et al. Combinated transplantation of
neural stem cells and collagen type I promote functional recovery after ce-
rebral ischemia in rats. Anat Rec 2010;293:911e7.
[24] Cholas RH, Hsu HP, Spector M. The reparative response to cross-linked
collagen-based scaffolds in a rat spinal cord gap model. Biomaterials
2012;33:2050e9.
[25] Vale CL, Tierney JF, Fisher D, Adams RA, Kaplan R, Maughan TS, et al. Does
anti-EGFR therapy improve outcome in advanced colorectal cancer? A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev 2012;38:618e25.
[26] Wolinsky JB, Colson YL, Grinstaff MW. Local drug delivery strategies for cancer
treatment: gels, nanoparticles, polymeric films, rods, and wafers. J Control
Release 2012;159:14e26.
[27] Vroemen M, Aigner L, Winkler J, Weidner N. Adult neural progenitor cell
grafts survive after acute spinal cord injury and integrate along axonal
pathways. Eur J Neurosci 2003;18:743e51.
[28] Wagner B, Natarajan A, Grunaug S, Kroismayr R, Wagner EF, Sibilia M.
Neuronal survival depends on EGFR signaling in cortical but not midbrain
astrocytes. EMBO J 2006;25:752e62.
[29] Geoffroy CG, Critchley JA, Castro DS, Ramelli S, Barraclough C, Descombes P,
et al. Engineering of dominant active basic Helix-Loop-Helix proteins that are
resistant to negative regulation by postnatal central nervous system anti-
neurogenic cues. Stem Cells 2009;27:847e56.
[30] Abematsu M, Tsujimura K, Yamano M, Saito M, Kohno K, Kohyama J, et al.
Neurons derived from transplanted neural stem cells restore disrupted
neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord injury. J Clin Invest
2010;120:3255e66.
[31] Buffo A, Rolando C, Ceruti S. Astrocytes in the damaged brain: molecular and
4 (2013) 5107e5116cellular insights into their reactive response and healing potential. Biochem
Pharmacol 2010;79:77e89.
