S 4  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 0 3  |  1 4  N O V E M B E R  2 0 1 3
C A S S A N D R A  W I L LY A R D
Just before sunrise on 2 November 2011, Katie Sharify got in her car and headed out on Interstate 5. The 23-year-old had been 
living with her parents in Pleasanton, Califor-
nia, while taking a break from her studies at 
the University of Southern California. On this 
day she needed to meet her academic advisor 
in Los Angeles to discuss her return. 
After about an hour driving, Sharify 
unbuckled her seatbelt and reached across 
to the passenger’s side to steady some energy 
drinks rolling around on the floor. She took 
her eyes off the road just long enough for the 
car to drift off the road. When the tires hit 
gravel, Sharify panicked and wrenched the 
steering wheel, sending the car careening off 
the opposite side of the highway and into a hill. 
“I remember everything up to the point where 
the air bag opened in my face,” she says. The 
crash left her covered in cuts and bruises, with 
broken ribs and a head injury. It also bruised 
Sharify’s spinal cord, paralysing her from the 
chest down. 
Just weeks after her accident, Sharify agreed 
to participate in one of the first clinical trials 
of a therapy using embryonic stem (ES) cells. 
Stem cells can become 
neurons and other 
nervous-system cells, 
and thus hold promise 
for repairing a damaged 
spinal cord. Soon after 
Sharify signed up, however, the company back-
ing the trial — the drugmaker Geron in Menlo 
Park, California — pulled the plug for finan-
cial reasons. Sharify, who was grandfathered 
in, still received the injection of 2 million stem 
cells, but she was the last of five patients ever 
enrolled. “There was a huge disappointment 
among patient advocates, patients and scien-
tists,” says Christopher Scott, a bioethicist at 
Stanford University. 
For many, the cessation of the trial was 
worse than disappointing. An estimated 
180,000 individuals around the world experi-
ence a traumatic spinal cord injury each year1. 
It can be a life-altering injury, and doctors have 
little to offer in the way of treatments. 
Today, however, the field seems to be 
S T E M  C E L L S
A time to heal 
The first stem-cell therapies for spinal cord injuries are already being tested in clinical 
studies, but scientific and political uncertainty remain. 
 NATURE.COM
Making mature cells 
adopt a stem-cell 
identity:  
go.nature.com/eptkgo
Neural stem cells can spread out, hopefully revealing ways to repair damaged control circuits in the spine.
S
C
IE
N
C
E 
P
H
O
TO
 L
IB
R
A
R
Y/
G
ET
TY
 IM
A
G
ES
OUTLOOK THE SPINE
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
1 4  N O V E M B E R  2 0 1 3  |  V O L  5 0 3  |  N A T U R E  |  S 5
again making headway. In October, Asterias 
Biotherapeutics, a subsidiary of the biotech-
nology firm BioTime, acquired the rights 
to Geron’s stem-cell division. The company, 
which occupies the same stem-cell research 
building Geron once occupied in Menlo Park 
and employs many of the same people, hopes 
to launch more trials to test therapies using 
ES cells in the coming years. Meanwhile, other 
companies are studying the safety of stem cells 
derived from fetal tissue. And scientists at the 
RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology in 
Kobe, Japan, are recruiting patients to a trial 
to test induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 
in treatments for an eye disease called age-
related macular degeneration. These iPS cells 
are adult cells that have been coaxed into an 
embryonic-like state. 
Keith Tansey, a neurologist at Emory Uni-
versity and the Shepherd Center in Atlanta, 
Georgia, where the first two participants in 
the Geron trial were enrolled, is glad to see 
the field moving forward. However, he and 
other researchers caution against unbridled 
optimism. A cure for spinal cord injuries 
might still be decades away, and US federal 
government support for stem-cell research 
is not a guarantee. When it comes to spinal 
cord injuries, “We just have to have reasonable 
expectations,” Tansey says. 
NEURONAL NURSEMAIDS
The millions of nerve cells that compose the 
spinal cord form bundles that convey electri-
cal signals between the brain and the rest of 
the body. A sudden blow can damage the ver-
tebrae and bruise the spinal cord, killing neu-
rons and the glial cells that support them and 
severing connections between nerves. Once 
the dead cells are cleared away by the immune 
system, a cavity remains. No signals can bridge 
this gap and the scar tissue that forms around 
it impedes the growth of new neurons. Inflam-
mation can also spark further damage to the 
cord. “The highest hope for a stem-cell ther-
apy would be that [it] could actually replace 
neurons that were lost,” Tansey says. 
But there may be other ways to repair the 
spine. Although some neurons die upon 
injury, others may merely be damaged. The 
myelin sheath, a protective layer that encases 
the long segments of nerve cells and helps to 
direct the electrical impulses, can be lost. “It’s 
like pulling insulation off an electric wire,” 
says Thomas Okarma, Geron’s former chief 
executive and now chief executive at Aste-
rias Biotherapeutics. Without myelin, the 
impulses travel slowly or not at all, and the 
nerves can short-circuit. 
Embryonic stem cells — first isolated in 1998 
— have the potential to mature into any type of 
cell in the body. Before the cells are injected into 
the spinal cord, scientists have to coax them to 
develop in a certain way. Geron prompted its 
ES cells to form precursors destined to become 
oligodendrocytes, a type of glial cell that forms 
myelin. The hope was that these cells would 
re-insulate the axons that had been spared, 
improving their function. But Geron’s research 
suggested that these cells can do more than just 
form myelin. They also promote the formation 
of new blood vessels and secrete growth factors 
called neurotrophins that help nerve cells recu-
perate2. “Injecting these cells is like injecting 
hundreds of drugs at the same time,” Okarma 
says. “It’s a new level of healing that goes far 
beyond what a scalpel or a pill could ever do.” 
But ES-cell therapy is not without risk. These 
cells can form a type of benign tumour known 
as a teratoma, one of the reasons researchers 
force them to differentiate before injecting 
them into the spine. They also secrete factors 
that may affect the activity of any remaining 
neurons. To gain approval for its ES-cell trial, 
Geron submitted an application to the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that 
was 21,000 pages long, one of the longest ever 
submitted to the agency. 
So far Geron’s treatment has not caused any 
adverse reactions related to the injection or 
the cell therapy. Okarma plans to request FDA 
approval to conduct a new trial using a higher 
dose of the cells in individuals with neck 
injuries. These patients have typically been 
excluded from trials because a loss of function 
could be life threatening — neck injuries can 
paralyse muscles that support breathing. But 
Okarma says that any gain in function would 
be easier to see and measure. “We’re trying to 
up the likelihood of success,” he says.
MULTIPOTENT SOLUTIONS
Other companies are banking on neural stem 
cells derived from donated fetal tissue. These 
cells can self-renew, but their potential is more 
limited than ES cells; they can only form neu-
rons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Some 
researchers argue that this limitation makes 
the fetal cells safer. “They’re necessarily more 
restricted,” says Aileen Anderson, a neurobi-
ologist at the University of California, Irvine, 
who studies the cells. What’s more, they have 
already been tested in clinical trials for other 
diseases. 
In 2011, StemCells, a company based in 
Newark, California, began a clinical trial in 
Zurich, Switzerland, to test the safety and effi-
cacy of neural stem cells in individuals with a 
spinal injury at chest level. A few patients with 
the most severe injuries have already received 
the treatment, a shot of 20 million cells. Mouse 
data suggest that the cells differentiate to form 
neurons and glia, and that the therapy can 
restore some function3. In February 2013, 
StemCells announced that two out of three 
subjects showed improved function a year after 
treatment. For example, one went from having 
no sensation or movement below the site of the 
This three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (a) shows neural stem cells (green) 
packed into a rat’s spinal cord (purple) injury between scars (red). These cells (b) can form new 
neural processes (green) with exiting neurons (red) to improve function.
a
b
Stem cells
Scar
Neural processes
Neurons 
M
A
R
TI
N
 M
A
R
S
A
LA
OUTLOOKTHE SPINE
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
S 6  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 0 3  |  1 4  N O V E M B E R  2 0 1 3
injury to having some movement. In October, 
the company received approval from the FDA 
to enrol patients in the United States. 
Neuralstem, based in Rockville, Maryland, 
received FDA approval to launch a phase I 
study in January 2013. As many as eight par-
ticipants with spinal injury at chest level will 
receive six injections of either 100,000 or 
200,000 spinal cord stem cells per injection. 
Neuralstem’s cells have already been tested in 
18 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
a motor neuron disease better known as Lou 
Gehrig’s disease, with no reported serious side 
effects. And a study published in May 2013 
reports that these cells repopulate the cavity 
that forms in the wake of spinal injury in rats 
and restore some of the lost function, includ-
ing sensory responses and movement4.
When the animals move, “the placement of 
the paw is much better controlled,” says Martin 
Marsala, a stem-cell researcher at the Univer-
sity of California, San Diego, who led the study. 
But the rats were not cured. “You always have 
some degree of deficit,” he says. 
When to administer the cells remains uncer-
tain. In the Geron trial, participants received 
the cells one or two weeks after injury. That 
comes with certain drawbacks. Patients who 
have been seriously injured are often too ill to 
make decisions about joining a clinical trial. 
And conditions at the injury site are not ideal. 
“The environment is unfriendly to regenera-
tion,” says Mani Vessal, a neuroscientist and 
scientific officer at the California Institute for 
Regenerative Medicine in San Francisco. “You 
have all these inflammatory factors that are 
rushing in.” 
StemCells and Neuralstem are waiting 
longer to treat. “There’s a little bit of a dogma 
that one would have to transplant within the 
first couple of weeks in order to see a func-
tional effect,” Anderson says. But Anderson’s 
research on rodents suggests that it might be 
possible to have an impact on chronic injuries 
as well3. StemCells is enrolling patients who 
are 3 months to 12 months post-injury. Neu-
ralstem’s trial will enrol individuals who are 
between one and two years past their injury. 
At this stage the patient will be easier to recruit, 
Tansey says. The downside is that they may not 
respond as well to the therapy. After the injury 
occurs, axons “start degenerating and sort of 
shrivel away,” Vessal says. 
One drawback of embryonic and fetal-
derived cell lines is their immunogenicity. 
Because these cells come from unrelated 
donors, they are not genetically matched to 
the patients receiving them. So patients are 
required to take immunosuppression drugs 
for a few months up to a year, “just to get past 
the initial transplant period and let everything 
heal,” Anderson says.
INDUCING OPTIONS
Induced pluripotent stem cells could bypass 
the problem of immune rejection, at least 
in theory. Cells could be removed from an 
injured patient, reprogrammed to become 
pluripotent and then turned into neural stem 
cells. In practice, however, the process becomes 
stickier. Developing iPS cells takes months. 
Hideyuki Okano, a stem-cell researcher at 
Keio University School of Medicine in Tokyo, 
has been studying the use of iPS cells to mend 
spinal injuries, and his unpublished research 
suggests that the best time to transplant stem 
cells is between two to four weeks post-injury. 
But according to Okano, “it’s impossible to 
prepare the iPS neural stem cell in two, three, 
four weeks.” 
Although iPS cells might solve some 
problems, they might cause others. Repro-
grammed cells can also form teratomas, and 
some reports suggest that they may be even 
more tumorigenic than ES cells. However, 
many researchers are striving to make them 
safer. For example, Okano’s group studied the 
impact of immature neural cells — derived 
from a human iPS clone known not to form 
tumours — on a primate model of spinal 
cord injury; the results showed maturing 
neural cells of several types and no evidence 
of tumours5. In July, the Japanese Ministry 
of Health, Labour and Welfare approved the 
first clinical trial using iPS cells. The study 
will assess the cells’ safety in individuals with 
age-related macular degeneration, and Okano 
hopes a clinical trial for patients with spinal 
cord injury will not be far behind. Shinya 
Yamanaka of Kyoto University in Japan is 
now developing clinical-grade iPS cells that 
Okano and other researchers could use for 
such a trial. 
What makes iPS cells attractive to many 
scientists is that their use might avoid the 
political problem of using embryos (see ‘By 
legal order’). 
Scientists are also investigating the poten-
tial of adult stem cells harvested from bone 
marrow or other tissues. These cells have 
been shown to secrete neurotrophic factors, 
but they do not seem to be able to replace lost 
neurons. A recent study found that three of 
ten patients with cervical spinal injury who 
received their own mesenchymal stem cells 
— progenitor cells that differentiate to form 
bone and cartilage — had more power in their 
upper limbs and less trouble performing daily 
activities than they did before receiving the 
stem cells6. 
Which cells will work best remains unclear. 
But Sharify hopes that researchers will eventu-
ally be able to answer that question. She says 
she envisages turning on the television one day, 
perhaps when she is “old and grey”, to find that 
researchers have discovered a cure for spinal 
cord injury. “I believe that science and technol-
ogy can find a cure,” she says. “That’s pretty 
much what keeps me going.” ■
Cassandra Willyard is a freelance science 
writer based in Brooklyn, New York. 
1. Lee, B. B. et al. Spinal Cord 1–7 (2013).
2. Zhang, Y. W., Denham, J. & Thies, R. S. Stem Cells 
Dev. 15, 943–952 (2006). 
3. Salazar, D. L. et al. PLoS ONE 18, e12272 (2010). 
4. van Gorp, S. et al. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 4, 57 (2013). 
5. Kobayashi, Y. et al. PLoS ONE doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0052787 (2012).
6. Park, J.  H. et al. Neurosurgery 70, 1238–1247  
(2012).
Ethical and legal concerns surrounding the 
use of embryonic stem cells persist. In the 
late 1990s, research using embryonic stem 
cells (ES) cells sparked a tense political 
debate. As a result, in 2001, US President 
George W. Bush banned federal funding 
for research on newly created ES cells. In 
2009, President Barack Obama reversed 
Bush’s ban, but political uncertainty 
remains, hampering research efforts. As 
Debra Mathews, a bioethicist at the Johns 
Hopkins Berman Institute for Bioethics in 
Baltimore, Maryland, says, “There was a 
point [in 2010] where all embryonic stem 
cell research at the National Institutes 
of Health stopped. Everyone had to put 
down their pipettes, put their cells in the 
freezers, and not touch anything.” Even now, 
Congress has not passed a law saying that 
ES cell research is legal, and the rules could 
change. “The next president could come in 
and say, ‘It’s illegal now’,” says Mathews.
The concerns extend beyond the United 
States. Guidelines published by Japan’s 
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare in 
2006 prohibited the use of embryonic stem 
cells in clinical research. That restriction 
was lifted in 2010, but by then many 
Japanese researchers had already shifted 
to iPS cells. 
Recent activities suggest that the 
pharmaceutical industry expects to be able 
to keep using iPS cells in clinical research. 
As an example, the StemBANCC — a 
public–private partnership that includes 
Eli Lilly in Basingstoke, UK, F. Hoffmann-
La Roche in Basel, Switzerland, and the 
University of Oxford, UK — is creating and 
characterizing iPS cells from 500 people to 
use in drug research.
So far, iPS cells have not attracted the 
negative attention that continues to slow 
down research on ES cells and fetal stem 
cells. — C. W.
B Y  L E G A L  O R D E R
Stem cells subject to political consent
OUTLOOK THE SPINE
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
