Leading Edge
c
T
ll
space left at the site of the spinal cord The ectopic colony in the floor of the fourthsurface of the spinal cord, and in the
fourth ventricle of the brainstem.
An example of ectopic colonies in
nostaining with Ki67, a marker for
proliferating cells, revealed abundant
Ki67-positive cells in the ectopic mass in
Cell masses in the fourth ventricle
are concerning because they could
grow to compress brainstem structures.the central canal is illustrated in Figure 1A
in a horizontal section through the center
the brainstem (Figure 1K), indicating
ongoing proliferation.
Colonies that send axons into the brain-
stem could cause abnormal activationinjury (Figure 1A). There was exuberant
axon outgrowth from the grafts into the
host spinal cord as reported by Lu et al.
(2012) (Figure 1B). We were surprised,
however, to find ectopic colonies of
graft-derived cells at long distances from
the transplant site, including in the central
canal of the spinal cord, adhered to the
ventricle extended axons into the dorsal
part of the tegmentum near the nucleus
of the solitary tract (Figures 1G and 1H).
Immunostaining of colonies with cell-
type-specific markers revealed GFAP-
positive cells with astrocyte morphology
(Figure 1I) and MAP2-positive processes
resembling dendrites (Figure 1J). Immu-Corresponden
Long-Distance M
Colonization of
Neural Stem Ce
A recent study reported remarkable
survival and exuberant axon outgrowth
from transplants of neural stem cells
(NSCs) in a fibrin matrix with growth fac-
tors that were grafted into a complete
spinal cord transection site in rats (Lu
et al., 2012). As part of the NIH-sup-
ported replication project (Facilities of
Research Excellence-Spinal Cord Injury),
we repeated key parts of that study.
Because this is a surgical intervention
that may depend on skills that require
extensive experience, we felt that the
goals of the replication would be best
served if the same surgeon performed
the lesion surgeries and transplants.
Accordingly, Dr. P. Lu traveled to UCI
to perform the surgical procedures with
aid of our staff. Also, because the cells
could be considered to be a ‘‘product’’
that was obtained for use in much the
same way as stem cells from a company,
the cells were prepared at UCSD and
were delivered to UCI on the day of the
grafting procedure.
Rats (n = 20) received complete spinal
cord transections at thoracic level 3 (T3)
and 2 weeks later received transplants
of neural stem cells (NSCs) isolated from
E14 rat embryos that express GFP. Spinal
cord injury and transplant surgeries were
done on 4 separate days over a 2 week
period.
By 9–10 weeks, NSC grafts had grown
and differentiated to completely fill in thee
igration and
ransplanted
s
of the spinal cord that had been immuno-
stained for GFP to reveal graft-derived
cells. Ectopic colonies of graft-derived
cells were evident in the central canal
approximately 4–7 mm rostral to the
transplant. The central canal was ex-
panded around the ectopic cell masses.
Having discovered ectopic colonies of
NSC-derived cells at long distances from
grafts of NSC’s, we screened for ectopic
colonies in other locations. Examination
of cross-sections taken from cervical
through high lumbar levels of the spinal
cord revealed ectopic colonies of graft-
derived cells in the central canal at cervi-
cal levels in four rats (Figures 1C and 1J),
and on the pial surface of the spinal cord
in nine rats. Figure 1D illustrates a colony
capping the dorsal horn near the dorsal
root entry zone. Examination of sections
through the brain revealed ectopic
colonies adhered to the brainstem and
in the fourth ventricle in four rats (Fig-
ure 1F). Overall, ectopic cell masses
were seen in rats that received transplants
on all four of the separate days.
The ectopic cell masses extendedGFP-
positive axons into the surrounding host
parenchyma. The masses in the central
canal extended axons into the spinal
cordparenchyma formingahaloof labeled
axons around the central canal (Figure 1E).
Ectopic colonies capping the dorsal horn
extended GFP-labeled axons into the
dorsal horn and dorsal root (Figure 1D).Cell 156The fact that ectopic masses are found
in the central canal, on the surface of
the spinal cord and in the fourth ventricle
suggests that cells may be carried by the
CSF. The size of the cell masses makes
it unlikely that the entire mass moved
because the masses were considerably
larger than the diameter of the central
canal. Thus it is likely that the cell
masses derived from a few cells that
pioneered the outpost and proliferated
in place.
The very surprising discovery of the
presence of ectopic cell clusters at long
distances from the transplant site raises
concerns in terms of therapies involving
stem cell transplants. It is especially
concerning that NSCs continue to pro-
liferate at ectopic locations, which could
enlarge the cell masses.
Whether these ectopic colonies are
harmful or not remains to be determined,
but their presence highlights an impor-
tant potential safety monitoring issue
for therapies involving stem cell trans-
plantation into the injured spinal cord.
Cell masses in the central canal at cervi-
cal levels are a concern because the
ectopic cell masses fill and expand the
central canal. Patients with spinal cord
injuries are already at risk for developing
a syrinx, a condition in which the central
canal expands leading to damage to
surrounding neural tissue (el Masry and
Biyani, 1996). Expansion of the central
canal at the cervical level can lead to
loss of pain sensitivity in the upper ex-
tremities due to interruption of axons
of second-order sensory neurons that
cross the midline beneath the central
canal. Expansion of the central canal in
the brainstem can be life threatening.
Connections formed by ectopic cell
masses with host neurons could also
be harmful. The cell masses that colonize
near the dorsal root entry zone extend
axons into the dorsal horn, which con-
tains second-order sensory neurons
that convey pain and temperature sensa-
tion. Activation of these second-order
neurons by axons from ectopic masses
could conceivably produce neuropathic
pain., January 30, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 385
Figure 1. Migration and Colonization of NSCs from Grafts Placed at the Site of a Complete Spinal Cord Transection at T3
(A) Horizontal section through the lesion site immunostained for green immunofluorescence (GFP). The main body of the graft at T3 is evident on the right side of
the image. Ectopic cell masses are evident in the central canal rostral to the injury.
(B) Image of GFP-labeled axons streaming from the graft in (A). Section was stained using DAB as the chromogen. Arrow indicates GFP-positive cells.
(C) Section through the cervical spinal cord at about C8 immunostained for GFP reveals a mass of graft-derived cells in the central canal (section stained using
DAB as the chromogen).
(D) Ectopic colony adhered to the dorsal part of the spinal cord at T12 overlying the dorsal horn and dorsal root entry zone (DREZ) (section stained using DAB as
the chromogen).
(E) High-magnification view of the rostral-most mass in the central canal in (A) stained using DAB as the chromogen. Note axons (ax) in a halo around the mass.
(F) Ectopic colony in the floor of the fourth ventricle adhered to the dorsal brainstem tegmentum.
(G) The same mass shown in (F) immunostained using DAB as the chromogen. Note axons (ax) extending toward the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST).
(H) higher-magnification view of axons in a section near the one shown in (G) extending along the dorsal part of the tegmentum.
(I) Same section illustrated in (F) immunostained for GFAP.
(J) Cross-section through the cervical region coimmunostained for GFP to reveal graft-derived cells and MAP2 to reveal dendrites. Brightness of the green
channel is attenuated to allow visualization of MAP2 immunofluorescence.
(K) Ectopic mass in the fourth ventricle immunostained for Ki67.
386 Cell 156, January 30, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
of brainstem nuclei. The ectopic colony
in the fourth ventricle sends axons near
the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST),
which controls critical functions such as
blood pressure and heart rate. It remains
to be seen whether other types of stem
cells show similar potential to form
ectopic colonies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NO1-NS-3-2353 to
O.S. We thank Dr. Paul Lu for carrying out spinal
cord injury surgeries and performing the trans-
plants and Lori Graham for preparing the NSCs.
Special thanks to the team at the Reeve-Irvine
Research Center, including Laine Butler, Jessica
Dzubnar, Sabhya Rana, Ardi Gunawan, Jennifer
Yonan, and Jamie Mizufuka for animal care and
histology.
Oswald Steward,1,2,* Kelli G. Sharp,1
and Kelly Matsudaira Yee1
1Reeve-Irvine Research Center
2Departments of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, Neurobiology and Behavior,
and Neurosurgery
University of California at Irvine School of
Medicine, Irvine, CA 92697-4265
*Correspondence: osteward@uci.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.017
REFERENCES
el Masry, W.S., and Biyani, A. (1996). J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 60, 141–146.
Lu, P., Wang, Y., Graham, L., McHale, K., Gao,
M., Wu, D., Brock, J., Blesch, A., Rosenzweig,
E.S., Havton, L.A., et al. (2012). Cell 150, 1264–
1273.Cell 156, January 30, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 387
