fr
 T
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ttreatment of SCI, because they have the potential to
replace lost neurons and glia, and to restore disrupted
connectivity at lesion sites. Recently we have come to
appreciate that grafts of NSCs to spinal cord lesion sites
are able to extend numerous new axons into the host
spinal cord for long distances, and to receive inputs from
injured host axons. On the basis of this bi-directional
growth of axons and establishment of reciprocal synapses,
NSCs form new relays between separated segments of
the spinal cord after injury (Fig. 1).
of genetic models available in mice. One early study in a
mouse model reported that embryonic mouse hippo-
campal neurons grafted into the intact rat cervical corti-
cospinal tract extended long, straight, and uniform axons
into host spinal cord white matter for distances as long as
8 mm (using a mouse specific marker, M6) [8]. The
extension of the donor axons was confirmed by retrograde
labeling with horseradish peroxidase. The graft-derived
axons were intermingled with the host myelinated axons.
Thus, this study was an early indicator that adult myelin is
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109Axonal growth and connectivity 
models of spinal cord injury
Paul Lu1,2, Ken Kadoya2 and Mark H
Spinal cord injury (SCI) damages both gray matter and white
matter, but white matter damage is responsible for the vast
majority of the subsequent functional loss. Neural stem cells
(NSCs) have been investigated as a means of improving
outcomes after SCI, either through neuroprotective
properties that limit secondary damage or by direct cell
replacement. This review will focus on cell replacement
strategies, and the ability of multipotent NSCs to form new
functional synaptic relays across sites of even severe SCI.
The ability of these early stage neurons to extend axons from
the lesion site in large numbers and over long distances
constitutes an important mechanism underlying their
potential to promote neural repair.
Addresses
1 Veterans Administration Medical Center, San Diego, CA, United States
2Department of Neurosciences, University of California – San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, United States
Corresponding author: Tuszynski, Mark H (mtuszynski@ucsd.edu)
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109
This review comes from a themed issue on Development and
regeneration
Edited by Oscar O Marı́n and Frank F Bradke
For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
Available online 5th April 2014
0959-4388/$ – see front matter, # Published by Elsevier Ltd.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.03.010
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in the death of neurons at
the injury site and the loss of axons that carry signals to
and from the brain. Axons of the injured adult central
nervous system (CNS) exhibit little ability to spon-
taneously regenerate, often resulting in permanent func-
tional deficits below the level of injury [1]. For more than
a decade, neural stem cells (NSCs) or neural precursor
cells (NPCs) have been an attractive cell source for the
ScienceDirecom neural stem cell grafts in
uszynski1,2
NSCs or NPCs can be isolated from the developing CNS,
or derived from pluripotent stem cells, including embryo-
nic stem (ES) cells or induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells. Here, we systematically review NSC transplan-
tation studies in SCI research, with an emphasis on axonal
growth and connectivity between transplanted and
injured host neurons. We conclude by discussing future
challenges in the field of NSC transplantation for SCI.
Axonal projections arising from neural stem
cell grafts
There is an extensive history of CNS tissue grafting in
models of SCI [2,3,4]. Early studies demonstrated axonal
projections from grafted tissue into host for distances as
long as 4–5 mm, using both anterograde and retrograde
axonal labeling techniques [3]. Intrinsic cellular markers
and reporters, such as green fluorescent protein (GFP)
and alkaline phosphatase (AP), may be more reliable
methods for labeling axons emerging from neural
implants than tracer injections. These cell-intrinsic repor-
ters are often readily visualized, and are less prone to
errors and misinterpretation arising from tracer mis-tar-
geting or spread [5]. Fischer’s group was among the first to
use cell reporters to trace axons arising from NSC
implants, and observed axonal outgrowth from grafts of
rat embryonic day 14 (E14) fetal spinal cord tissue expres-
sing alkaline phosphatase for distances of 5 mm in the
injured spinal cord [6], although there was considerable
variation among animals. They also found that cells
isolated from the developing spinal cord at the neuronal
restricted precursor (NRP) stage failed to extend appreci-
able numbers of axons into the host spinal cord 3–5 weeks
post-transplantation [6]. Axons will, however, emerge in
greater numbers from NRP cell implants when attracted
by the neurotrophic factor brain derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), injected adjacent to the implant [7].
Many studies have examined the role of NSCs in rat
models of SCI. Some studies have also utilized mouse
models, a potential advantage when considering the array
104 Development and RegenerationFig. 1
Reticulospinal
tract
NSC
graft
DRG
neuron Motor
neuronnot necessarily inhibitory to the extension of developing
axons. Other studies grafting mouse NSCs into spinal
cord lesion models yielded less clear evidence of axonal
growth, however, possibly due to limited graft survival,
glial differentiation of implanted cells [9], cell immorta-
lization [10], or inhibitory effects of glia or myelin sur-
rounding the lesion site [11].
Recently, we initiated a series of studies to more
thoroughly explore the hypothesis that early stage
neurons would exhibit an ability to extend axons in the
lesioned adult CNS, even after severe forms of injury
[12]. To approach this question, we adopted a few
changes from previous studies. First, we used NSCs or
multipotent NPCs that robustly expressed enhanced
GFP (EGFP), to allow unequivocal tracking of cell sur-
vival, fate and axonal extension in vivo. Second, because
we were grafting cells into a severe injury model, we
directed considerable effort toward developing methods
to enhance graft cell survival, retention and filling of even
severe lesion sites. This was accomplished by grafting
cells in a fibrin matrix that retained cells in the large lesion
site, and by grafting cells with a protein cocktail of growth
factors to support cell survival and vascular ingrowth
Current Opinion in Neurobiology
Diagram of a neuronal relay formation by transplanted NSCs after SCI.
Descending supraspinal axons (a reticulospinal axon as an example, red)
regenerate into and make synaptic connections with grafted neurons
(green) in the lesion site. Grafted neurons extend their axons (green) into
caudal host spinal cord and make synaptic connection with host
neurons (a motor neuron as an example, yellow). Similarly, grafted
neurons can make functional relay for ascending sensory system (a
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron as an example, blue).
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109 (Fig. 2) [12]. Without the cocktail, graft filling of the
lesion site was incomplete and did not allow the formation
of neural relays from host to graft, and graft to host.
We began these studies by using donor cells from the E14
spinal cord, which consists of a mixture of NSCs and cells
committed to either neuronal fates (NRPs) or glial fates
(glial restricted precursors, GRPs) [6,12]. Cells at the
NPC stage are capable of continuing to divide for several
times to generate additional cells, but they do not con-
tinue to propagate a NSC population. The NPCs were
isolated from fresh E14 spinal cords, dissociated gently
with trypsin, and immediately grafted into sites of complete
T3 spinal cord transection, in a fibrin matrix with growth
factor cocktail (Fig. 2). We did not culture the cells before
grafting, because additional culture time results in an
attenuation of the ability of grafted neurons to extend
axons after grafting in vivo. Cells were isolated from
Fischer 344 rat embryos and grafted into adult Fischer
344 rats; because this rat strain is inbred, immunosuppres-
sion was not needed. This study was one of the few in the
SCI literature that used a complete transection model; the
model has generally been avoided because of the diffi-
culty in achieving cell survival and altering injury-associ-
ated anatomical and functional losses.
When examined 7 weeks later, grafted rat NSCs and
NPCs consistently filled the complete transection site.
The implanted cells differentiated into neurons, astro-
cytes and oligodendrocytes in roughly equal proportions.
Most importantly, grafted neurons extended very large
numbers of axons into the host spinal cord both rostral and
caudal direction to the lesion [12]. Remarkably, the
progenitor cell-derived axons grew for distances of more
than 20 mm (7 spinal segments) in the rostral direction
and 27 mm (9 segments) in the caudal direction. We
conservatively quantified 29.000 GFP-labeled axons emer-
ging from the graft in the caudal direction, at a distance
0.5 mm caudal to the lesion. In addition, 22% of progeni-
tor cell-derived axons became myelinated by host oligo-
dendrocytes at a distance 3 mm caudal to the graft
(unpublished data). A time course study demonstrated
that graft-derived axons grew at a rapid rate of 1-2 mm/
day along host white matter at early stages [12]. These
findings established very clearly that developing neurons
are able to extend axons over very long distances in the
adult CNS, even when intimately associated with adult
myelin membranes from host axons.
Other studies have demonstrated that adult-derived
NSCs also survive grafting to sites of SCI. The subven-
tricular zone and hippocampal fissure are sites of ongoing
neurogenesis throughout life, providing neurons to the
olfactory bulb and hippocampus, respectively [13]. NSCs
were harvested from both of these structures and grafted
to the spinal cord [14–17]. While some cells survive
grafting, almost all grafted cells adopted glial fates, and
www.sciencedirect.com
Axonal growth of neural stem cell graft after spinal cord injury Lu, Kadoya and Tuszynski 105
CsFig. 2
(a)
(c)
Fibrin /NS 
Fibrinogen
NSCs
GFsmany cells expressed oligodendroglial markers and in
some cases myelinated host axons. When comparing
findings from these studies to studies that grafted devel-
oping rather than adult stem cells, it is evident that the
age, source and method of cell grafting to sites of SCI has
a profound effect on cell survival, differentiation and
ability to extend axons.
The preceding studies used NSCs isolated from rodents.
Human NSCs have also been grafted to the rodent
nervous system in an effort to determine whether human
NSCs can also be harvested and grafted, and whether
they exert detectable effects in the nervous system.
Wictorin and Bjorklund [18] grafted human fetal spinal
cord-derived cell suspensions from weeks 6 to 7 of human
development into the spinal cords of adult rats. Grafts
were placed both one spinal cord segment above or below
a partial lesion site. They found partial graft survival and
extension of human axons into host white matter; most
axons grew for lengths of 3–4 mm, but a few axons
extended for distances as long as 10 mm, 3–4 months
post-grafting. However, human cells were implanted into
undamaged spinal cord parenchyma surrounding the
lesion site, and cells were not implanted in the actual
Transplantation of neural stem cells with fibrin and growth factors to retain an
(A) Neural stem cells (NSCs) are first re-suspended into a Fibrinogen matrix 
cord lesion site. (B) A separate companion batch of NSCs is re-suspended i
and injected into the spinal cord injury site immediately following the first in
Fibrin with the growth factor cocktail (GFs) to retain and support graft surviv
www.sciencedirect.com (b)
 /GFs
Thrombin
NSCs
GFslesion site [18]. Wictorin and colleagues also reported long
distance growth of human forebrain-derived axons that
were grafted into the rat brain [19].
Giovanini and colleagues [20] conducted a more in-depth
characterization of human fetal spinal cord transplan-
tation into rat adult SCI. In contrast to the previous
findings, human graft-derived axons rarely extended into
host white matter. Instead, human dendrites and some
axons projected into host gray matter over short distances
[20]. The rare growth of human axons into the host may
have been related to poor graft survival and integration
into the lesion site, since immunosuppression was not
reported in this xenograft study.
Recent studies have grafted human fetal nervous system-
derived NSCs in rodent and primate models of SCI
[21,22,23,24]. These studies focused on the differen-
tiation of the grafted human cells, and did not label cells
with markers that could sensitively detect axonal out-
growth from grafts. Graft survival was relatively modest,
and labeling for human-specific neurofilament disclosed
only short distance growth of human axons from grafts in
the lesion site [23].
Current Opinion in Neurobiology
d support their survival, growth, and differentiation after spinal cord injury.
containing a growth factor cocktail (GFs) and are injected into the spinal
nto a Thrombin matrix containing the same growth factor cocktail (GFs),
jection. (C) The mixture of Fibrinogen and Thrombin forms a solid gel of
al and growth.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109
106 Development and RegenerationFig. 3
(a)
(b)Given our findings that rat NSCs/NPCs could extend
many axons for very long distances in the severely injured
spinal cord [12], we also examined whether human
NSCs exhibited similar properties when grafted in a fibrin
matrix and supporting growth factor cocktail. Human
NSCs were isolated from two sources: the human
embryonic spinal cord [24] and the ES cell lines HUES7
[25]. These cells were grafted into severe spinal cord
lesion sites in immuno-deficient rats. Robust long-dis-
tance axonal growth was evident 7–12 weeks post-grafting
(Fig. 3) [12]. Indeed, the amount and distance over
which human axons extended exceeded observations
from grafts of donor rodent NSCs, perhaps because of
the prolonged developmental period of the human com-
pared to the rat. Axons extended over a distance of 50 mm
into the spinal cord caudal to the lesion site, and 30 mm
rostral to the lesion site. Indeed, axons densely extended
into the brainstem from grafts placed at the mid-cervical
level. Recent studies by others confirmed that human
spinal cord-derived NSCs extend axons from a spinal cord
Growth of human ES cells-derived neural stem cells in sites of spinal cord inju
of C5 hemisection SCI. Horizontal section immunolabeled for GFP and Neu
localized with Tuj1) extending caudally into the host spinal cord. (B and C) 
axonal growth in host (B) white matter and (C) gray matter (region of NeuN 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109 (c)
c
b
NeuN
GFPlesion site in rats [26,27]. Thus, the ability of developing
neurons to extend axons in large numbers and over long
distances through inhibitory white matter extends across
species, including humans.
The recent development of iPS cells can serve as an
alternative stem cell source for generation of NSCs [28].
The advantage of iPS cells over ES cells is that iPS cells
are adult-derived and can be transplanted autologously to
avoid both ethical concerns and, potentially, immune
rejection. Human iPS cell-derived NSCs have been
transplanted into rodent models of SCI, where they have
been reported to differentiate into both neurons and glia
in several recent studies [29,30,31]. However, axonal
growth and connectivity from human iPS cell grafts has
not reported. We recently grafted human NSCs derived
from iPS cells into mid-cervical spinal cord lesion sites in
adult immunodeficient rats. We found, once again, exten-
sive axonal outgrowth from the injury site into virtually all
regions of the spinal cord caudal and rostral to the injury
Current Opinion in Neurobiology
ry. (A) GFP-labeled human ES cells-derived NSCs were grafted into sites
N demonstrate remarkably large numbers of GFP-labeled axons (co-
Higher magnification view from boxed area of panel A showing human
labeling). Scale bar: A, 600 mm; (B and C), 22 mm.
www.sciencedirect.com
Axonal growth of neural stem cell graft after spinal cord injury Lu, Kadoya and Tuszynski 107site (Lu et al., unpublished result). Indeed, human axons
traveled virtually the entire rostral-to-caudal length of the
rat CNS.
Connectivity and function of axons arising
from neural stem cell grafts
Several studies have reported connectivity and functional
recovery after grafting various types of NSCs to sites of
SCI, although the strength of evidence supporting these
reports varies across studies. The first study that grafted
mouse ES cell-derived NSCs to a site of contusive rat SCI
reported functional recovery, but provided no detailed
mechanism [32]. However, only 8% of grafted cells
became neurons in this study, and there was no labeling
of neuronal processes. Another study also reported a slight
improvement in motor function after grafting human
NSCs to a moderately severe contusive injury, and this
recovery was abolished by eliminating the grafted cells by
diphtheria toxin administration [23]. However, cell sur-
vival in this study was modest and axonal outgrowth from
the graft was not assessed. Neuroprotection may have
been a mechanism supporting the functional outcome.
Several studies focused on grafting cells derived from
human ES cells and driven to more specific fate, such as
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) [33,34,35]. Mod-
est functional benefits were reported and grafted cells
were shown to partially remyelinate host axons spared by
after partial injuries. These studies led to the first clinical
trial of human ES-derived cells for SCI in the United
States [36]. After enrolling four patients, the clinical trial
was abandoned by the sponsoring company, Geron.
In our own work with grafts of either rodent or human
NSCs described in the preceding section, we found that
graft-derived axons grew in highly organized linear tra-
jectories through host white matter. Axons in white
matter gave off collateral branches that penetrated host
gray matter, forming bouton-like terminals around some
host neurons. These bouton-like structures co-labeled
with the pre-synaptic marker synaptophysin, suggesting
synapse formation. Indeed, immunoelectron microscopy
confirmed synapse formation between graft-derived
axons and host neurons and dendrites [12]. Thus, it
is clearly the case that grafted NSCs derived from several
different sources, including developing CNS tissue or ES
cells or iPS cells, can connect with host neurons. Yet
return of function is not always observed, suggesting a
need to further shape the topography and specificity of
projections from grafted cells (more on this topic below).
Axonal projection and connectivity from host
neurons into neural stem cell grafts
The outgrowth and connectivity of grafted NSCs is only
one component of neuronal relay formation. A complete
neuronal relay also relies on ingrowth and connectivity of
host axons with grafted neurons. Several studies have
reported regeneration of adult host axons, including
www.sciencedirect.com rubrospinal, reticulospinal, raphespinal, propriospinal,
and sensory axons, into grafts of embryonic spinal cord
tissue or ES cell-derived NSCs placed in sites of SCI
[3,4,7,10,37,38]. However, the distance and relative
density of ingrowth of adult host axons into the grafts is
typically fairly modest. Moreover, several older studies
used retrograde labeling techniques to assess axonal
growth into grafts, rather than the more clear and less
artifact-prone technique of anterograde labeling [2,3].
Our recent study showed results similar to that in the
published literature, indicating that ingrowth of host
supraspinal axons, including anterogradely labeled reti-
culospinal axons and immunolabeled serotonergic axons
[12], is relatively modest. While host supraspinal axons
usually penetrated the rostral host/graft interface, they are
substantially reduced in number in the middle of NSC
grafts. We never observed host supraspinal axons crossing
over the entire NSC graft and re-entering the caudal
spinal cord. Compared to axonal outgrowth arising from
NSCs, therefore, host axonal ingrowth into grafts is lim-
ited. This appears to be at least partially due to the
refractory growth state of adult neurons. Nonetheless,
host axons entering NSC grafts form bouton-like struc-
tures with grafted NSCs in the lesion site and express the
pre-synaptic marker synaptophysin, suggesting synaptic
connections with grafted neurons [12].
This reciprocal growth of axons from grafted NSCs into
the host, and from host neurons into the grafted NSCs,
establishes a mechanism whereby novel relay circuits
across an injury can be established. Indeed, we observed
behavioral improvement in rats that received NSC grafts
even in sites of severe, complete spinal cord transection
[12]. Electrophysiologcal measures confirmed the for-
mation of neural transmission across the lesion site, with
responses detected that exhibited prolonged latency and
altered waveforms compared to intact animals. Moreover,
both functional recovery and electrophysiological trans-
mission were abolished by re-transection of the spinal
cord above the NSC implant [12], indicating that host
inputs into the graft are essential in mediating functional
recovery. Other studies have also suggested that novel
relays can be established across sites of SCI to support
improvement of function [7,11,39,40]. Collectively,
these findings indicate that NSC grafts to sites of SCI
have the potential to interpose a new neural relay to act as
a substrate for functional improvement.
Future perspectives
Axonal growth from NSCs and the potential formation of
new functional neuronal relays across lesion sites offers
new hope for SCI treatment. Several challenges remain.
The modest growth and regeneration of adult host axons
into the NSC grafts is one challenge, since the intrinsic
growth capacity of adult neurons is greatly reduced [41].
Enhancing the intrinsic adult neuronal growth state
[42,43] or provision of neurotrophic factors in regions
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109
108 Development and Regenerationof lesioned axon terminals [44] could enhance host
axonal regeneration and strengthen the functional
neuronal relay. The seemingly random organization of
the NSC graft in the lesion cavity is another challenge.
Grafting NSCs within bioengineered scaffolds that seg-
regate the lesion site into specific rostral-caudal channels
may provide a means of organizing the lesion site: host
axons could be directed into the graft along specific linear
trajectories, and graft-derived axons could exit the scaf-
folds in matching linear trajectories mimicking the organ-
ization of the intact spinal cord [45]. In addition, the
optimal neuronal phenotypes that might optimize relay
formation are unknown. Most likely, a combination of
different spinal cord neuronal phenotypes will be needed
to optimize functional recovery. Furthermore, the very
large numbers of axons extending from NSC grafts may
project to ectopic targets, making undesirable connec-
tions with host neurons due to a lack of guidance mol-
ecules [46]. Exogenous provision of guidance molecules
may direct newly growing axons toward proper host target
neurons. Finally, intensive rehabilitation may re-shape
newly generated circuits and enhance functional recov-
ery, since training and activity influence new circuit
formation during development, particularly by activity-
dependent stabilization of new connections and pruning
of weak connections [47].
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by grants from the Veterans Administration, NIH
(NS09881), the Craig H. Neilsen Foundation, the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon
G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation, and the California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1. Ramon YC:: Degeneration and regeneration of the nerve system.
New York: Hafner; 1928, .
2.

Reier PJ: Neural tissue grafts and repair of the injured spinal
cord. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1985, 11:81-104.
First proposal of neuronal relay hypothesis.
3. Jakeman LB, Reier PJ: Axonal projections between fetal spinal
cord transplants and the adult rat spinal cord: a
neuroanatomical tracing study of local interactions. J Comp
Neurol 1991, 307:311-334.
4. Bregman BS, Coumans JV, Dai HN, Kuhn PL, Lynskey J,
McAtee M, Sandhu F: Transplants and neurotrophic factors
increase regeneration and recovery of function after spinal
cord injury. Prog Brain Res 2002, 137:257-273.
5. Steward O, Zheng B, Banos K, Yee KM: Response to: Kim et al.,
‘‘axon regeneration in young adult mice lacking Nogo-A/B.’’
Neuron 38, 187-199. Neuron 2007, 54:191-195.
6.

Lepore AC, Fischer I: Lineage-restricted neural precursors
survive, migrate, and differentiate following transplantation
into the injured adult spinal cord. Exp Neurol 2005,
194:230-242.First study using report gene to trace axonal growth from the NSC graft.
7.

Bonner JF, Connors TM, Silverman WF, Kowalski DP, Lemay MA,
Fischer I: Grafted neural progenitors integrate and restore
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109 synaptic connectivity across the injured spinal cord. J
Neurosci 2011, 31:4675-4686.
First study to demonstrate neuronal relay formation for ascending sen-
sory system.
8.

Li Y, Raisman G: Long axon growth from embryonic neurons
transplanted into myelinated tracts of the adult rat spinal cord.
Brain Res 1993, 629:115-127.
First study to challenge the white matter inhibition theory.
9. Lowry N, Goderie SK, Adamo M, Lederman P, Charniga C, Gill J,
Silver J, Temple S: Multipotent embryonic spinal cord stem
cells expanded by endothelial factors and Shh/RA promote
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 2008,
209:510-522.
10. Lu P, Jones LL, Snyder EY, Tuszynski MH: Neural stem cells
constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote
extensive host axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Exp
Neurol 2003, 181:115-129.
11. Abematsu M, Tsujimura K, Yamano M, Saito M, Kohno K,
Kohyama J, Namihira M, Komiya S, Nakashima K: Neurons
derived from transplanted neural stem cells restore disrupted
neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord injury. J Clin
Invest 2010, 120:3255-3266.
12.

Lu P, Wang Y, Graham L, McHale K, Gao M, Wu D, Brock J,
Blesch A, Rosenzweig ES, Havton LA et al.: Long-distance
growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after severe
spinal cord injury. Cell 2012, 150:1264-1273.
First study to demonstrate extensive and long-distance growth of axons
from NSC graft of different species and from different resources. In
addition, this is the first study to demonstrate functional neuronal relay
formation for descending motor system in severe SCI.
13. Mu Y, Lee SW, Gage FH: Signaling in adult neurogenesis. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 2010, 20:416-423.
14. Cao QL, Zhang YP, Howard RM, Walters WM, Tsoulfas P,
Whittemore SR: Pluripotent stem cells engrafted into the
normal or lesioned adult rat spinal cord are restricted to a glial
lineage. Exp Neurol 2001, 167:48-58.
15. Pfeifer K, Vroemen M, Blesch A, Weidner N: Adult neural
progenitor cells provide a permissive guiding substrate for
corticospinal axon growth following spinal cord injury. Eur J
Neurosci 2004, 20:1695-1704.
16. Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Eftekharpour E, Wang J, Schut D,
Fehlings MG: Synergistic effects of transplanted adult neural
stem/progenitor cells, chondroitinase, and growth
factors promote functional repair and plasticity of the
chronically injured spinal cord. J Neurosci 2010,
30:1657-1676.
17. Cusimano M, Biziato D, Brambilla E, Donega M, Alfaro-Cervello C,
Snider S, Salani G, Pucci F, Comi G, Garcia-Verdugo JM et al.:
Transplanted neural stem/precursor cells instruct phagocytes
and reduce secondary tissue damage in the injured spinal
cord. Brain 2012, 135:447-460.
18. Wictorin K, Bjorklund A: Axon outgrowth from grafts of human
embryonic spinal cord in the lesioned adult rat spinal cord.
Neuroreport 1992, 3:1045-1048.
19.

Wictorin K, Brundin P, Gustavii B, Lindvall O, Bjorklund A:
Reformation of long axon pathways in adult rat central
nervous system by human forebrain neuroblasts. Nature 1990,
347:556-558.
First study to demonstrate long-distance growth human axons in the adult
brain.
20. Giovanini MA, Reier PJ, Eskin TA, Wirth E, Anderson DK:
Characteristics of human fetal spinal cord grafts in the adult
rat spinal cord: influences of lesion and grafting conditions.
Exp Neurol 1997, 148:523-543.
21. Iwanami A, Kaneko S, Nakamura M, Kanemura Y, Mori H,
Kobayashi S, Yamasaki M, Momoshima S, Ishii H, Ando K et al.:
Transplantation of human neural stem cells for spinal cord
injury in primates. J Neurosci Res 2005, 80:182-190.22. Watanabe K, Nakamura M, Iwanami A, Fujita Y, Kanemura Y,
Toyama Y, Okano H: Comparison between fetal spinal-cord-
and forebrain-derived neural stem/progenitor cells as a
www.sciencedirect.com
source of transplantation for spinal cord injury. Develop
Neurosci 2004, 26:275-287.
23. Cummings BJ, Uchida N, Tamaki SJ, Salazar DL, Hooshmand M,
Summers R, Gage FH, Anderson AJ: Human neural stem
cells differentiate and promote locomotor recovery in spinal
cord-injured mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:14069-14074.
35.

Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G, Totoiu M, Cloutier F, Sharp K,
Steward O: Human embryonic stem cell-derived
oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and
restore locomotion after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 2005,
25:4694-4705.
A study of OPC transplant in SCI led for the first stem cell clinical trial for
SCI in USA.
36. Kaiser J: Embryonic stem cells. Researchers mull impact of
Axonal growth of neural stem cell graft after spinal cord injury Lu, Kadoya and Tuszynski 10924. Yan J, Xu L, Welsh AM, Hatfield G, Hazel T, Johe K, Koliatsos VE:
Extensive neuronal differentiation of human neural stem cell
grafts in adult rat spinal cord. PLoS Med 2007, 4:e39.
25. Cowan CA, Klimanskaya I, McMahon J, Atienza J, Witmyer J,
Zucker JP, Wang S, Morton CC, McMahon AP, Powers D et al.:
Derivation of embryonic stem-cell lines from human
blastocysts. N Engl J Med 2004, 350:1353-1356.
26. Zhao J, Sun W, Cho HM, Ouyang H, Li W, Lin Y, Do J, Zhang L,
Ding S, Liu Y et al.: Integration and long distance axonal
regeneration in the central nervous system from transplanted
primitive neural stem cells. J Biol Chem 2013, 288:164-168.
27. van Gorp S, Leerink M, Kakinohana O, Platoshyn O, Santucci C,
Galik J, Joosten EA, Hruska-Plochan M, Goldberg D, Marsala S
et al.: Amelioration of motor/sensory dysfunction and
spasticity in a rat model of acute lumbar spinal cord injury by
human neural stem cell transplantation. Stem Cell Res Ther
2013, 4:57.
28.

Takahashi K, Yamanaka S: Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by
defined factors. Cell 2006, 126:663-676.
First study of to generate IPSC from mouse embryonic and adult fibro-
blasts.
29.

Tsuji O, Miura K, Okada Y, Fujiyoshi K, Mukaino M, Nagoshi N,
Kitamura K, Kumagai G, Nishino M, Tomisato S et al.: Therapeutic
potential of appropriately evaluated safe-induced pluripotent
stem cells for spinal cord injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:12704-12709.
First study of IPSC transplantation for SCI.
30. Nori S, Okada Y, Yasuda A, Tsuji O, Takahashi Y, Kobayashi Y,
Fujiyoshi K, Koike M, Uchiyama Y, Ikeda E et al.: Grafted human-
induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived neurospheres promote
motor functional recovery after spinal cord injury in mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108:16825-16830.
31. Fujimoto Y, Abematsu M, Falk A, Tsujimura K, Sanosaka T,
Juliandi B, Semi K, Namihira M, Komiya S, Smith A et al.:
Treatment of a mouse model of spinal cord injury by
transplantation of human induced pluripotent stem cell-
derived long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial-like stem
cells. Stem Cells 2012, 30:1163-1173.
32.

McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y, Liu S, Mickey SK, Turetsky D,
Gottlieb DI, Choi DW: Transplanted embryonic stem cells
survive, differentiate and promote recovery in injured rat
spinal cord. Nat Med 1999, 5:1410-1412.
First transplantation study of mouse ES cells derived NSCs for SCI.
33. Sharp J, Frame J, Siegenthaler M, Nistor G, Keirstead HS: Human
embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell
transplants improve recovery after cervical spinal cord injury.
Stem Cells 2010, 28:152-163.
34. Liu S, Qu Y, Stewart TJ, Howard MJ, Chakrabortty S,
Holekamp TF, McDonald JW: Embryonic stem cells differentiate
into oligodendrocytes and myelinate in culture and after spinal
cord transplantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000,
97:6126-6131.www.sciencedirect.com Geron’s sudden exit from field. Science 2011, 334:1043.
37.

Iwashita Y, Kawaguchi S, Murata M: Restoration of function by
replacement of spinal cord segments in the rat. Nature 1994,
367:167-170.
First study demonstration of a functional fetal spinal cord bridge for
neonatal rats with spinal cord transection.
38. Bregman BS, McAtee M, Dai HN, Kuhn PL: Neurotrophic factors
increase axonal growth after spinal cord injury and
transplantation in the adult rat. Exp Neurol 1997, 148:475-494.
39. White TE, Lane MA, Sandhu MS, O’Steen BE, Fuller DD, Reier PJ:
Neuronal progenitor transplantation and respiratory
outcomes following upper cervical spinal cord injury in adult
rats. Exp Neurol 2010, 225:231-236.
40. Coumans JV, Lin TT, Dai HN, MacArthur L, McAtee M, Nash C,
Bregman BS: Axonal regeneration and functional recovery
after complete spinal cord transection in rats by delayed
treatment with transplants and neurotrophins. J Neurosci 2001,
21:9334-9344.
41. Sun F, He Z: Neuronal intrinsic barriers for axon regeneration in
the adult CNS. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2010, 20:510-518.
42.

Liu K, Lu Y, Lee JK, Samara R, Willenberg R, Sears-Kraxberger I,
Tedeschi A, Park KK, Jin D, Cai B et al.: PTEN deletion enhances
the regenerative ability of adult corticospinal neurons. Nat
Neurosci 2010, 13:1075-1081.
First demonstration of injured adult corticospinal tract axon re-growth
and sprouting after PTEN deletion.
43.

Blackmore MG, Wang Z, Lerch JK, Motti D, Zhang YP, Shields CB,
Lee JK, Goldberg JL, Lemmon VP, Bixby JL: Kruppel-like Factor
7 engineered for transcriptional activation promotes axon
regeneration in the adult corticospinal tract. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2012, 109:7517-7522.
First demonstration of injured adult corticospinal tract axon re-growth
and sprouting after over-expression of KLF-7 in vivo.
44.

Lu P, Blesch A, Graham L, Wang Y, Samara R, Banos K,
Haringer V, Havton L, Weishaupt N, Bennett D et al.: Motor axonal
regeneration after partial and complete spinal cord
transection. J Neurosci 2012, 32:8208-8218.
First clear demonstration of descending motor axonal regeneration
crossing complete transection site and entering to caudal spinal cord
after combination of cAMP and neurotrophic factor delivery.
45. Gao M, Lu P, Bednark B, Lynam D, Conner JM, Sakamoto J,
Tuszynski MH: Templated agarose scaffolds for the support of
motor axon regeneration into sites of complete spinal cord
transection. Biomaterials 2013, 34:1529-1536.
46. Canty AJ, Murphy M: Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance
in the developing corticospinal tract. Prog Neurobiol 2008,
85:214-235.
47. Vinay L, Brocard F, Clarac F, Norreel JC, Pearlstein E, Pflieger JF:
Development of posture and locomotion: an interplay of
endogenously generated activities and neurotrophic actions by
descending pathways. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2002, 40:118-129.Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2014, 27:103–109
