ABSTRACT
There are currently no fully restorative therapies for
human spinal cord injury (SCI). Here, we briefly review the
different types of human SCI pathology as well as the most
commonly used rodent and nonhuman primate models of
SCI that are used to simulate these pathologies and to test
potential therapies. We then discuss various high profile
(sometimes controversial) experimental strategies that have
reported CNS axon regeneration and functional recovery of
limb movement using these animal models of SCI. We par-
ticularly focus upon strategies that have been tested both in
rodents and in nonhuman primates, and highlight those
which are currently transitioning to clinical tests or trials in
humans. Finally we discuss ways in which animal studies
might be improved and what the future may hold for physi-
cal therapists involved in rehabilitation of humans with SCI.
Key Words: plasticity, SCI, regeneration, animal, human, ther-
apies, functional recovery
INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord injury (SCI) affects hundreds of thousands of
people worldwide, with massive associated health care and
other socioeconomic costs.1 Damage to the spinal cord
results most notoriously in flaccid paralysis and loss of nor-
mal sensation in the limbs below the level of the lesion.
Spinal cord injury may also lead to debilitating pain, spas-
ticity, impairments in breathing and coughing, bowel or
bladder problems, and reduced reproductive ability or sex-
ual sensation.1 People with SCI may suffer from autonomic
dysreflexia and may be at increased risk for stroke, decubi-
tus ulcers, fractures, and depression. There are no fully
restorative clinical therapies for SCI.
In attempts to develop therapeutic strategies for over-
coming each of these sequelae, researchers often rely upon
animal models of SCI. These enhance our understanding of
the cellular and molecular response of the mammalian
spinal cord to injury,and they allow us to evaluate the safety
and efficacy of potential therapies for improving outcome.
Use of animal models has shown that dysfunction following
SCI results from interruption of descending and ascending
spinal axons and loss of both myelin and cells including
neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. Many axons
regenerate following injury to the peripheral nervous sys-
tem (PNS) but few, if any, axons regenerate long distances
following injury to the central nervous system (CNS).1 This
review will discuss strategies for promoting regeneration of
CNS axon tracts and recovery of limb function in animal
models of SCI.
Although beyond the scope of this review, there are
other extremely important efforts aimed at restoring nor-
mal function after SCI. For example, following the initial
insult to the spinal cord, further structure and function is
lost through active secondary processes.2 Substantial effort
has been devoted to limiting this secondary damage
through development of neuroprotective measures.3
Substantial effort also has been dedicated to improving
upon the small degree of endogenous repair that proceeds
spontaneously in the spinal cord.4,5 For example, strategies
for improving conduction through spared axons have been
tested in animals and in humans.6 Strategies for treating
pain and sexual, bladder, or bowel dysfunction and auto-
nomic dysreflexia are also beyond the remit of this article.
Readers are directed to excellent recent reviews of these
fields in this volume and elsewhere.1,3,6,7
The present review will first outline different types of
human SCI and will discuss how contemporary animal
models of SCI attempt to simulate these pathologies. Next,
we will discuss cellular and molecular strategies for improv-
ing CNS axon regeneration and recovery of limb function
after SCI. Special consideration will be given to experi-
mental strategies that have been evaluated in nonhuman
primates and/or are currently transitioning to clinical stud-
ies or trials.7 We will highlight where strategies remain con-
troversial, and where safety or efficacy barriers to translat-
ing experimental strategies exist. The aim is to inform
readers of exciting laboratory advances, but to temper this
with a realistic understanding of the challenges that remain
in developing effective and safe therapies for humans.
HUMAN SCI IS PATHOLOGICALLY HETEROGENEOUS 
The response of the human spinal cord to injury has
been studied using imaging techniques as well as by histo-
logical staining and inspection of autopsy material.8 These
studies reveal 4 classes of lesion. In one study of 48 speci-
mens,8 in 33% of cases, contusion injuries resulted in cavity
and cyst formation, typically with some sparing of white
matter (or glial tissue) but with the external glial limiting
membrane (the glia limitans) remaining intact. In 29% of
cases, massive compression or maceration occurred due to
vertebral displacement whereas in 21% of cases, laceration
occurred due to cord penetration by foreign bodies or bony
fragments. After compression, maceration or laceration,
From Animal Models to Humans:  Strategies for Promoting CNS Axon
Regeneration and Recovery of Limb Function after Spinal Cord Injury
Lawrence Moon,1 Mary Bartlett Bunge1,2
1Post Doctoral Associate,The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Miami, FL (lmoon@miamiproject.med.miami.edu)
2Professor, Departments of Cell Biology and Anatomy and Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL
55 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 56
substantial breaks in the glia limitans led to the epicenter
being filled predominantly with connective tissue;cysts and
cavities were less prominent. In 17% of cases, solid core
injuries manifested as either central cord syndrome (with
loss of myelin and axons, but with preservation of gray mat-
ter), or as chronic cord compression (with loss of myelin
and/or motor neurons in the epicenter, but with preserva-
tion of axonal integrity). The extent of demyelination, the
invasion of host cells and the deposition of growth-
inhibitory molecules (see below) at sites of human SCI also
have been documented.9.10
Various animal models of SCI have been developed in
order to model each of these different types of human
injury. The relative merits and limitations of these models
will be discussed next, since these directly affect the ability
of the researcher to develop safe and effective strategies for
improving CNS axon regeneration and motor function after
SCI.
ANIMAL MODELS OF SCI ARE DESIGNED TO 
SIMULATE DIFFERENT TYPES OF HUMAN SCI
The vast majority of mammalian SCI research is con-
ducted using adult mice and rats, although some work has
been done using cats and dogs, and increasing work is
being done using nonhuman primates. Contusion injuries
in the human are typically modeled using devices that dis-
place11-12 or impact13 the exposed spinal cord. Compression
injuries may be simulated by subdural insertion and infla-
tion of a balloon14 or by clip compression.15 Methods for
inducing contusion via vertebral displacement have also
recently been developed.16 Laceration injuries are usually
modeled by surgical incision, including complete transec-
tion,17,18 dorsal hemisection,19 or lateral hemisection.20 In all
cases, the aim is to produce reproducible graded (or com-
plete) injuries.
The animal model selected by the researcher largely
depends upon the hypothesis to be tested. Researchers
testing neuroprotective strategies often employ contusion
or compression injuries. Those testing pro-regenerative
strategies typically prefer models that involve transection of
all tracts (complete) or some tracts (eg, dorsal column for
sensory axons ascending in the fasciculi gracilis and cunea-
tus) as these allow one to distinguish regenerating axons
from axons that were spared or that sprouted a collateral.21
Cervical injuries are typically chosen to test therapies for
improvement of forelimb movement while thoracic injuries
are usually selected to evaluate therapies for improvement
of hindlimb movement.
In the USA alone, a large number of people live with
existing spinal cord injuries and a substantial number
receive injuries each year (prevalence ~250,000; incidence
~11,00022). Different temporal opportunities to intervene
therapeutically therefore exist. Thus the time between the
injury and the time of treatment and of evaluation in an ani-
mal model is of critical importance. ‘Acute,’ ‘subchronic,’
and ‘chronic’ have all been used to describe postinjury
phases, but here we prefer to specify precise numbers of
hours, days, months, or years. The majority of animal stud-
ies involve interventions within minutes, hours, or days of
injury. There are far fewer studies reporting improvements
in CNS axon regeneration or functional outcome after inter-
vening more than one month postinjury23–28 and this imbal-
ance requires much redressing if CNS axon regeneration is
to be promoted in individuals with long-standing injuries.
Additionally, the majority of studies only assess outcomes
over a period of weeks or months. Relatively few studies
that report improvements in CNS axon regeneration and
functional recovery go on to determine whether these
changes remain stable beyond 2 or 3 months.
Data from animal models show that only a small per-
centage of CNS axons need to be spared to mediate rea-
sonable locomotion. Partial locomotion on a treadmill is
possible following lesions that spare only 5% to 10% of
axons in adult mammalian thoracic spinal cord.29,30 For
example, following spinal cord compression in the adult
cat, remaining nerve fibers became myelinated by Schwann
cells and were able to support spontaneous walking.31
These data are encouraging as they suggest that only a small
percentage of axons need to regenerate and form func-
tional connections to restore useful function.
It is important to bear in mind that rodent models only
approximate normal human locomotion and dysfunction
after SCI. Bipedal locomotion (humans and birds) differs
radically from quadrupedal locomotion (rodents and most
mammals) or partially upright locomotion (nonhuman pri-
mates) in terms of posture, kinematics, physiology, and
anatomy. Further, whereas many studies show that rodent
spinal cords respond to injury in ways similar to that of the
human,32,33 it is clear that there are differences in responses
to SCI between species and even between strains of a given
species.34 For example, whereas many human spinal cord
injuries become cystic or cavitated, very little cavitation
occurs following contusion injury to many strains of adult
mice.32 The histopathological response of the primate spinal
cord to injury has been studied only relatively little, includ-
ing after injection of autologous fibroblasts into otherwise
uninjured rhesus monkeys35 and after contusion injury in
rhesus monkeys.36–38 This situation is likely to improve since
a graded model of contusion injury in marmosets has
recently been developed39 and a number of groups are now
testing potential therapeutics in nonhuman primates (see
below). Given the differences between rodent and primate
nervous systems, it seems reasonable to test pro-regenera-
tive therapies in nonhuman primates for safety and efficacy.
The paucity of safety and efficacy studies using nonhuman
primates makes it somewhat remarkable therefore that so
many clinical studies and trials are in progress.7
In summary, researchers who test therapeutics designed
to improve function after SCI select animal models that sim-
ulate particular aspects of the human pathology. Animal
models indicate that axon regeneration by a small percent-
age of injured CNS neurons may be sufficient to restore par-
57 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
tial function. As will be reviewed next, factors intrinsic and
extrinsic to neurons limit CNS axon regeneration.40,41
Modulation of these intrinsic and extrinsic factors can pro-
mote CNS axon regeneration and recovery of function in
animal models of SCI. As will be described, these successes
are leading to clinical tests and trials.
EXTRINSIC FACTORS 
Transplants of peripheral nerve promote CNS axon
regeneration and functional repair after SCI
Axon regeneration and functional recovery occurs spon-
taneously (if incompletely) after injury to the adult mam-
malian PNS. Early experiments therefore attempted to pro-
mote CNS axon regeneration by transplantation of PNS seg-
ments into the mammalian CNS. Advances in retrograde trac-
ing techniques allowed the unambiguous demonstration that
neurons in many (but not all) different regions of the CNS
can regenerate axons into PNS grafts.42 Transplants of periph-
eral nerves as a strategy for promoting CNS axon regenera-
tion and functional repair are in part attractive because autol-
ogous grafts reduce the risk of immune rejection and obviate
the consequent need for immunosuppression.
There are limits, however, on the ability of PNS grafts to
promote axon regeneration and functional repair after SCI.
In rat models of SCI, supraspinal axons (eg, from the red
nucleus and from cortex) do not extend axons into periph-
eral nerve grafts placed into thoracic sites of SCI.43–45 Further,
CNS axons that do extend into peripheral nerve grafts rarely
exit grafts distally to form synapses or to restore function
unless routed directly to appropriate targets.46
As a result of these limitations, combination strategies
have been tested and found to enhance long distance CNS
nerve regeneration and motor recovery following SCI and
implantation of peripheral nerve. For example, in adult rats,
following creation of a gap in the dorsal columns, trans-
plants of peripheral nerve support regeneration of the cen-
tral branch of sensory axons from lumbar dorsal root gan-
glia (DRG)47 and some of these axons grow out of grafts
when growth factors are infused rostrally.48,49
In several studies, multiple segments of intercostal
peripheral nerve have been transplanted autologously fol-
lowing complete thoracic transection and creation of a 5
mm gap. Nerves were routed from white matter to distal
gray matter and secured using fibrin glue containing acidic
fibroblast growth factor. In studies using adult rats, corti-
cospinal (CST) axons regenerated through and beyond the
nerve bridges50 and hindlimb functional recovery was
reported.51 Importantly, this work recently has been repro-
duced and extended independently. In one study,
somatosensory and motor cortex-evoked potentials demon-
strated recovery of electrophysiological connectivity from
motor cortex to hindlimb muscles and from sciatic nerves
to sensorimotor cortex.52 Extent of recovery in hindlimb
function in the open field correlated positively with motor
evoked potential amplitudes in hindlimbs. In some cases,
weight supported stepping was reported. Transection of
grafts 6 months after implantation abolished electrophysio-
logical and behavioral recovery, interpreted to mean that
functional improvements were dependent on long tract
regeneration. In another study, axons from the cortex and
brainstem nuclei (including vestibular, red and raphe nuclei,
and reticular formation) were also reported as regenerating
beyond transplants into the distal spinal cord, accompanied
by improvements in hindlimb function including instances
of weight supported hindlimb stepping.53
Using a similar strategy, peripheral nerves have been
grafted autologously into nonhuman primates (cynomolo-
gous monkeys) after lateral spinal hemisection20 with evi-
dence for regeneration of at least some spinal axons at 4
months postinjury. No functional differences were detected
between control and experimental monkeys in this study.
This approach also has been used to treat one human
case of clinically complete SCI, with a report of limited
functional recovery.54 This study did not include control
subjects and therefore additional work remains to be done
to determine whether therapies involving peripheral nerve
bridge grafting safely and effectively improve outcome after
SCI in humans.
Transplants of Schwann cells promote CNS axon
regeneration and functional repair after SCI
Axon regeneration through peripheral nerves is largely
due to the presence of growth-promoting Schwann cells
(SCs).55 While grafts of peripheral nerve are suited to bridg-
ing regular gaps in the injured human spinal cord, many of
the cysts and cavities that often form after SCI are irregularly
shaped and below the cord surface, and therefore less
amenable to bridging with segments of peripheral nerve.
Purified SCs have therefore attracted attention as candidates
for promoting CNS axon regeneration and functional repair
after SCI because they can be transplanted as suspensions.
Additionally, use of mitogens allows rat or human (but, to
date, not mouse) SCs from small biopsies of adult peripheral
nerve to be dramatically expanded in culture56 to produce
sufficient numbers to bridge large gaps in the spinal cord.57
Purified populations of rat SCs from peripheral nerve
have been transplanted into rat models of SCI, injected as
suspensions 1 week after contusion injury,58 or implanted
within channels containing extracellular matrix (Matrigel or
fibrin) immediately following lateral hemisection59 or com-
plete transection.18 After transection and implantation of
SCs, sensory and spinal axons with cell bodies near the
grafts extend axons into these bridge grafts, are myeli-
nated,18 and are electrophysiologically active.60 After contu-
sion and implantation of SCs, less cavitation is observed and
sensory and spinal axons extend axons into grafts, and are
myelinated.58 In the transection model, regenerating axons
do not leave the grafts distally to reinnervate the host: com-
bination therapies including SCs have therefore been the
subject of investigation.
Various combinations of therapies have been reported
to enhance long distance CNS nerve regeneration and
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 58
recovery of hindlimb function following SCI and implanta-
tion of Schwann cells. Following transection of adult rat
thoracic spinal cord, SCs have been transplanted with deliv-
ery of growth factors including brain derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF)61 or BDNF with neurotrophin-3 (NT-3).17 The
SCs have also been transplanted in combination with anti-
inflammatory steroids (methylprednisolone),62 and with
other regeneration-promoting cells including olfactory
ensheathing glia (OEG).63 Increased regeneration of CNS
axons into and beyond bridges was reported in several of
these studies. Following thoracic contusion in adult rats,
SCs compared to OEG were found to be less effective than
SC-only transplants.58
Purified populations of human SCs from peripheral
nerve have also been transplanted into the injured rodent
spinal cord (within channels containing Matrigel).64 To
avoid rejection of grafted cells, nude rats (that have attenu-
ated immune systems and were treated with methylpred-
nisolone) were used as hosts. Under these conditions,
regeneration of brainstem-spinal axons into Schwann cell
grafts was observed and propriospinal neurons regenerated
up to 2.6 mm distal to grafts. Mild functional improvements
were also reported, including extensive movements of
ankles, knees, and hips (sweeping without weight bearing)
and occasional weight bearing in stance. Weight-supported
stepping was only observed in a single rat.
To date, SCs have not been transplanted into humans fol-
lowing SCI. A number of hurdles remain. Since transplanting
SCs alone affords only a small level of recovery of function, it
remains important to find the most effective and repro-
ducible combination therapy involving SCs. It will also be
important to ensure that transplantation of SCs is safe.
Although mitogen stimulated human SCs do not form tumors
after implantation into mouse PNS, it will be important to
check this after implantation into the injured spinal cord.65
One important step towards human clinical trials would be
to test the safety and efficacy of transplanting autologous SCs
into nonhuman primates following contusive SCI.39
Transplants of OEG promote CNS axon regeneration
and functional repair after SCI
Central nervous system axon regeneration and func-
tional recovery also has been reported when OEG are trans-
planted immediately after SCI66–69 or after a delay of 426 or 8
weeks.27 In one study using adult rats, following lateral
hemisection of the cervical spinal cord, injection of OEG
improved respiratory function and enhanced performance
on a climbing task.69 In other studies using adult rats, fol-
lowing thoracic transection and implantation of OEG into
spinal cord stumps, regeneration of long descending tracts
important for locomotion has been reported,26,68 even up to
2.5 cm distally, for serotonergic axons.70 Recovery has also
been reported in adult rats after transection and implanta-
tion of OEG when testing hindlimb function using an
inclined plane.70 Between 3 and 7 months post-transplanta-
tion, many transplanted rats were capable of propelling
their bodies up a wire grid inclined at 45º and onto a hori-
zontal platform at the top.
Primate72 and human OEG73 derived from olfactory bulb
or lamina propria, are now being tested in rodent and non-
human primate models of SCI and demyelination.74 Over
500 transplants of cells from human fetal olfactory bulbs
have been performed in humans in China with reports of
modest rapid improvement in function.75 Because in many
cases mild recovery of function is reported to occur within
1 or 2 days, it undoubtedly does not depend upon long dis-
tance regeneration of CNS axons but perhaps on secretion
of trophic factors or induction of local changes in circuitry.
To date, comprehensive follow-up studies have not been
performed, so it is difficult to gauge the long-term safety
and efficacy of this intervention.7
Do transplants of immune/inflammatory cells pro-
mote or impair CNS axon regeneration and func-
tional repair after SCI?
Spontaneous axon regeneration in the PNS also has been
partly attributed to the abundance of inflammatory cells
including macrophages. Macrophages in the CNS derive
predominantly from resident microglia but also come from
blood-borne monocytes.76 Monocytes enter the CNS more
slowly and in fewer number than in the PNS and they differ
phenotypically from monocytes that have entered the
PNS.77,78 For these reasons, it has been hypothesized that
transplants of monocytes preactivated by exposure to PNS
tissue may boost CNS axon regeneration and functional
recovery in animal models of SCI.
In one study,homologous monocytes, activated by prein-
cubation with PNS tissue, were implanted immediately fol-
lowing transection of adult rat thoracic spinal cord, result-
ing in improved CNS axon regeneration.79 Partial recovery
of hindlimb movements was observed during open field
locomotor testing. Hindlimb muscle responses were also
evoked by cortical stimulation. Finally, loss of function after
re-transection was taken to indicate a dependence of recov-
ery upon axon regeneration. In a more recent paper,mono-
cytes were activated by preincubation with skin, and func-
tional recovery was reported following implantation into a
contusion injury model in adult rats.80
In stark contrast to these findings, several studies indi-
cate that inflammatory cells aggravate outcome after SCI.
Subpopulations of macrophages within the injured spinal
cord are found in regions that subsequently cavitate81 and
intraspinal injection of a macrophage activator (zymosan)
worsens cavitation.82 Finally, pharmacological depletion of
macrophages at 1, 3, and 6 days after injury (using clo-
dronate) actually improves functional recovery after contu-
sion injury in adult rats.83 These data argue that transplan-
tation of inflammatory cells risks worsening the original
injury and may increase disability after SCI.
Transplantation of inflammatory cells for treatment of
SCI is therefore extremely controversial. Replication and
within-experiment comparison of these rodent studies by
59 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
independent laboratories would be extremely valuable.
Testing of autologous (not allografted), activated monocytes
would also be informative. To date, we know of no studies
investigating the safety or efficacy of transplanting immune
or inflammatory cells into injured nonhuman primate
spinal cord. Despite this, clinical trials involving transplan-
tation of autologous, activated monocytes are currently in
progress, supported by Proneuron Biotechnologies.7
Transplants of embryonic/fetal spinal cord promote
CNS axon regeneration and motor recovery after SCI
Fetal spinal cord transplants have been shown to pro-
mote regeneration of CNS axons following resection lesions
of adult rat spinal cord and in contused adult rat and cat
spinal cord. A variety of host axons from distances up to 6
mm away grow short (<500µm) distances into, and inner-
vate, the grafts including serotonergic and coerulospinal
axons.84 Innervation of the host tissue by transplanted neu-
rons is also observed. Despite the attenuation in scar for-
mation induced by transplantation of immature tissue, the
number of axons to cross the host/graft interfaces in either
direction is usually relatively small. Modest but significant
functional recovery is observed following transplantation of
immature tissue in rats84 and in cats 1 to 3 months after con-
tusion SCI.85 For example, although there was no improve-
ment on inclined plane or grid walking up to 3 months
postimplantation, 2 indices of gait analysis (base of support
and stride length) showed statistically significant improve-
ment.86,87 Improvements in locomotion were also observed
following delayed transplantation of immature tissue into
contusion injured adult cat spinal cord and electrophysio-
logical evidence suggested ascending host axons made
synapses with graft neurons.88 However, recovery does not
appear to depend on long distance growth into, through
and beyond grafts and the authors of those studies specu-
lated that transplants behave as relays, affording transmis-
sion of signals via the transplanted neurons which are
innervated by proximal host neurons and project in turn to
distal host neurons. Grafts may also provide growth factors
or may improve conduction in spared axons, perhaps by
remyelination or neuroprotection.89
Transplants of embryonic tissue may also enhance func-
tion of spared circuitry caudal to the lesion thereby improv-
ing local somatic and visceral responses. One study demon-
strated that serotonergic neurons from the embryonic raphe
nucleus grafted caudal to a complete cord transection in the
adult rat influenced penile erectile function90 and enhanced
weight support and treadmill locomotion in spinal rats.91
Since grafts of fetal/embryonic tissue promote recovery
but without concomitant long distance axon regeneration
beyond the graft/host interface, co-treatment strategies
have been evaluated. In one study, fetal tissue transplanted
2 to 4 weeks after injury, when combined with neu-
rotrophin delivery, promoted regrowth of axons caudal to
the transection site, resulting in plantar foot placement and
weight-supported stepping in adult rats.92
Fetal cell grafts slightly reduce neurological dysfunction
following human SCI.89 In one study, 41 patients with clini-
cally complete thoracic spinal cord lesions and progressive
syringomyelia received multiple subpial grafts of human neo-
cortex from 8 to 9 week old fetuses usually within 6 to 12
months of injury (cited in reference 89). A trend towards
improved neurological outcome over a few dermatomal lev-
els was observed relative to patients who had laminectomy,
durotomy, and lysis of adhesions. There were no reports of
morbidity,mortality,or increased pain. However, it should be
noted that as yet, there is no available evidence for graft sur-
vival or CNS axon regeneration in humans. Fetal cell grafts
have also been used in an attempt to prevent additional loss
of function in cases of progressive syringomyelia and to date
there appear to have been few negative outcomes associated
with transplantation.93,94 Therapeutic strategies involving tis-
sue derived from human embryos or fetuses remain ethically
controversial and therefore clinical trials are additionally
challenging to conduct.
Transplants of progenitor cells may improve motor
recovery following SCI
Multipotent progenitor cells (cells that have the capacity
to differentiate into many different cell types) and stem
cells (cells having the capacity to self-renew indefinitely
and differentiate into any cell type) appear to exist in adults
as well as in embryos and these may have the potential to
replace cells of different types that die after SCI. Since it is
in practice difficult (if not impossible) to establish that a
precursor cell is capable of indefinite division and of differ-
entiation into all possible phenotypes,here we prefer to use
the term progenitor. Transplants of purified progenitor cells
from embryos and adult tissues are now being tested in ani-
mal models of SCI.95 The following cell types are among
those that have been transplanted in animal models of SCI:
human umbilical cord progenitors,96 bone marrow stromal
cells,97 murine cell-line cells,98 and populations of multipo-
tent cells derived from human fetal brain99 and human
embryonic spinal cord.100
To date, however, where multipotent cells promote
recovery of function in animal models of CNS injury, axons
do not appear to regenerate through and beyond grafts.96,98
One study has shown that immortalized neural progenitors
promote PNS axon growth following SCI.101 Alternative
explanations for recovery of function include cell replace-
ment, creation of new neuronal relays, myelination, neuro-
protection, and/or plasticity.102,103
Researchers also have recently begun investigating trans-
plants of multipotent cells with restricted fates. Grafts of
glial-restricted precursors promote mild ingrowth of CST
axons.104 Grafted neuronal-restricted precursors extend
axons de novo after grafting into the intact spinal cord105
although differentiation into mature neurons appears to be
inhibited after grafting into the contusion-injured spinal
cord.106
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 60
Recently, neural progenitors derived from 8 week old
human fetuses have been transplanted into immunosup-
pressed nonhuman primates 9 days following cervical con-
tusion injury.107 There was a statistically significant differ-
ence in spontaneous locomotion within the cage and in
forelimb grip power between marmosets transplanted with
cells relative to those transplanted with culture medium
only. Eight weeks following transplantation, histopathology
revealed reduced cavitation but no evidence of tumor for-
mation. Some surviving grafted cells expressed markers
characteristic of neurons or glia and there was evidence for
some PNS or CNS axon ingrowth.
Autologous transplants of progenitor cells remain to be
tested in rodent or primate models of SCI. Future experi-
ments using animals may also show whether it is possible
to induce regeneration and repair by stimulating the
response of endogenous adult progenitors. Finally, several
clinical studies are attempting to evaluate whether trans-
plantation of progenitor cells improves outcome after
human SCI (eg, cells from bone marrow).7
Delivery of growth factors promotes CNS axon
regeneration and motor recovery after SCI
Growth factors potently promote axon regeneration
during nervous system development and after PNS injury.
Following contusion or transection injury to the adult rat
spinal cord, however, message levels for many growth fac-
tors remain almost undetectable (including neurotrophins
3 and 4), or only briefly and slightly upregulated (including
nerve growth factor (NGF) and glial cell line-derived neu-
rotrophic factor).108 After SCI, message levels for neu-
rotrophin receptors on neurons remain absent (trkA), unal-
tered (trkB, trkC),or only slightly upregulated (p75).108 Brain
derived neurotrophic factor may not be available for signal-
ing through its high affinity receptor (trkB) since there is a
large, fast,and sustained upregulation of competitor binding
sites (truncated trkB receptors) that may dominate as non-
functional sinks for the active neurotrophin.109 In summary,
after SCI, CNS neurons may lack the ability to respond to
generally low levels of most growth factors.
Consequently, to promote CNS axon regeneration and
functional recovery after SCI, supplementary growth fac-
tors have been delivered to neuronal cell bodies (eg, in
brainstem or cortex) or SCI sites by direct injection,110 by
osmotic minipump,17 by application within fibrin glue,111 or
by gene transfer techniques.61,112-114 Delivery of growth fac-
tors can enhance long distance anatomical, electrophysio-
logical, and behavioral recovery of CNS axons in vivo. For
example, following dorsal hemisection lesions of adult rat
spinal cord and immediate implantation of NT-3-secreting
fibroblasts, CST axons grew up to 8 mm distal to the injury
site with reduced locomotor deficits on a gridwalk task 1
and 3 months postinjury.113 Following cervical lateral hemi-
section and implantation of BDNF-expressing fibroblasts
(together with methylprednisolone and immunosuppres-
sion), up to 7% of rubrospinal neurons regenerated beyond
the transplant site.112,114 Forelimb use was also partially
restored, and more so when transplants were placed early
after injury rather than when delayed 6 weeks.28
Although many neurons die after axotomy, severely atro-
phied neurons can be rescued. In one study, severe atrophy
of rubrospinal neurons could be reversed by applying
BDNF to the cell bodies up to one year after injury.25
Further, this treatment promoted the regeneration of these
rubrospinal axons into peripheral nerve transplants
engrafted at the cervical SCI site.
Growth factors have also been delivered to the nonhu-
man primate spinal cord using autologous fibroblasts genet-
ically modified to produce NGF.115 Three months after
implantation into rhesus monkeys, sensory and putative
coerulospinal axons were found to regenerate into NGF-
secreting grafts. Since these monkeys had not been given
deliberate spinal cord injuries, further work is required to
show whether delivery of growth factors promote CNS
axon regeneration and functional recovery in injured non-
human primates.
Disappointingly, clinical trials using systemic delivery of
high doses of neurotrophins for various nervous system dis-
orders have run into a number of difficulties, including
induction of side effects including severe muscular pain,
fever, depression, and hallucinations.116 Targeted delivery of
physiological doses of growth factors (eg, by using viral
vectors) may prove safer and more efficacious.
Scar tissue modifiers enhance CNS axon regeneration
and functional recovery after SCI
Extrinsic factors that limit CNS axon regeneration also
include factors associated with myelin and the injury site.
Spinal cord injury sites, particularly those resulting from
penetrating injury, are also typically filled with multiple lay-
ers of fibroblasts. This scar tissue represents a formidable
physical barrier to CNS axon regeneration,117 the cells often
being oriented perpendicular to the neuraxis (appearing
geometrically impenetrable) and containing molecular
inhibitors of growth including chondroitin sulfate gly-
cosaminoglycans (CS GAGs).40,118
In adult rats, degradation of CS GAGs by delivery of the
bacterial enzyme, chondroitinase ABC, promotes regenera-
tion of injured CNS axons119 and recovery of function after
dorsal hemisection.120 Following spinal cord hemisection in
adult rats, delivery of chondroitinase ABC also promotes
regrowth of axons from spinal cord neurons into grafts of
peripheral nerve121 and regrowth of CNS axons into spinal
cord beyond hemichannel bridges containing SCs and
Matrigel.122 Following complete transection and implanta-
tion of channels containing SCs and Matrigel, delivery of
chondroitinase ABC and immunoglobulin promotes regen-
eration of serotonergic axons beyond grafts.123 Repeated
intrathecal delivery of chondroitinase ABC also promotes
hindlimb recovery following severe (but not moderate) tho-
racic contusion injury in adult rats.124
61 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
A number of safety and delivery issues remain to be tack-
led. Delivery of bacterial proteins to humans carries a risk
of nonspecific immune responses. Further, repeated dosing
(as is typically performed in animal models of SCI using
chondroitinase ABC) may not be possible if the immune sys-
tem develops responses to neutralize these foreign pro-
teins. Thus efforts are underway to develop smaller, less
immunogenic yet enzymatically active variants of chon-
droitinase ABC. Human enzymes (eg, hyaluronidases or
matrix metalloproteinases) that cleave CS GAGs might also
avoid these side effects. Encouragingly, a preparation of
chondroitinase ABC is currently being tested in Phase 2 clin-
ical trials for herniated lumbar discs125 and FDA approval for
this therapy might accelerate clinical trials for SCI. In due
course, chondroitinase ABC should be tested for safety and
efficacy in nonhuman primate models of SCI.
Therapies that target myelin inhibitors promote CNS
growth and functional recovery
Intact and injured CNS myelin contains a number of dif-
ferent growth inhibitory molecules.126 These include Nogo-
A, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) and oligodendro-
cyte myelin glycoprotein (OMgp). Various therapeutics
have been developed to target and overcome these
inhibitors of axon growth, most notably the antibody IN-1,
which binds to Nogo-A and neutralizes its inhibitory
effects.126
The CNS axon growth and recovery of limb function
have been reported in various animal models of SCI follow-
ing delivery of anti-Nogo therapeutics. In the original
experiments, small numbers of adult rat CST axons were
observed approximately 1 cm beyond sites of thoracic dor-
sal hemisection following implantation of hybridoma cells
secreting IN-1.19,127 Further,between 7 and 12 weeks postle-
sion, low threshold stimulation of hindlimbs enhanced the
incidence of paw placing responses in 8 of 10 animals
treated with IN-1 antibodies but in no control animals, and
this effect was abolished by bilateral sensorimotor cortex
ablation.128 Administration of IN-1 antibodies also potenti-
ated CST axon growth after dorsal hemisection in adult rats
and implantation of embryonic tissue127 or following injec-
tion of NT-3 either immediately after SCI129 or after a delay
of 2 or 8 weeks.24 IN-1 also induced CNS axons to sprout
collaterals, for example, following unilateral injury of the
CST at the level of the brainstem.130,131
Recently, and promisingly, IN-1 has been shown to pro-
mote growth of CST axons following unilateral lesioning in
4 out of 5 marmoset monkeys tested.132 Recombinant,
humanized fragments of IN-1 and immunoglobulin G class
antibodies against Nogo-A have so far been tested in 2 rat
stroke models133 and in a dorsal hemisection model of SCI.134
To date, however, no reports exist of testing anti-Nogo
therapies in contusion or compression models of SCI. This
is important because anti-Nogo antibodies apparently do
not promote long distance CNS axon regeneration in all
models tested,130,131,135 particularly in larger injuries such as
those involving transection.111,136 It will also be important to
evaluate whether anti-Nogo strategies have any adverse out-
comes in animal models of SCI. One study indicates no
increase in tail flick (interpreted as no increase in nocicep-
tion) 5 weeks following dorsal overhemisection and deliv-
ery of IN-1 in adult rats.137 Clinical trials using antibodies
against Nogo-A are currently being planned in association
with Novartis.
A peptide inhibitor (NEP1-40) targeting a receptor for
Nogo-A (NgR) has also been developed138 in order to pre-
vent neurons from responding to this inhibitor.
Remarkably, subcutaneous treatment with NEP1-40 one
week after thoracic dorsal hemisection promotes growth of
CST axons and serotonergic fibers and a degree of locomo-
tor recovery.139 Intrathecal delivery of NEP1-40 also pro-
motes regrowth of rubrospinal axons and a degree of func-
tional recovery after rat SCI.140 Biogen Idec Inc. holds a
license for NgR-related therapeutics and clinical trials may
follow.
INTRINSIC FACTORS
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
Various strategies exist to boost CNS axon regeneration
by targeting molecules intrinsic to neurons. For example,
levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) are
higher in young, growing neurons than in older neurons.
Levels of cAMP are low in neurons in a state of growth arrest,
such as those cultured on growth-inhibitory MAG, and deliv-
ery of cAMP analogs relieves this growth-arrest in vitro.141
To test the hypothesis that elevation of cAMP boosts
CNS axon regeneration in adult rats, cAMP analogs have
been injected into adult rat DRG one week prior to thoracic
dorsal column hemisection. In 2 studies, centrally project-
ing sensory axons regrew better within injury sites.142,143
Combining strategies, preinjury administration of cAMP
with postinjury delivery of NT-3, promotes regeneration of
sensory axons within and beyond transplants of bone mar-
row stromal cells.144 In these studies, however, it should be
noted that administration of cAMP or NT-3 alone did not
promote regeneration of axons beyond grafts.
Since prophylactic treatments for SCI are inappropriate,
postinjury delivery of drugs that boost cAMP levels are
being tested. Postinjury delivery of a cAMP analog pro-
motes CNS axon regeneration after SCI in fish.145
A fall in the levels of endogenous cAMP after SCI in adult
rats can be prevented by delivery of the phosphodiesterase
inhibitor, rolipram, which prevents the hydrolysis of
cAMP.146 After cervical hemisection in adult rats, delivery of
rolipram promotes growth of serotonergic axons into fetal
tissue transplants and enhances placing of the impaired
forelimb during rearing.147 After spinal cord contusion,adult
rats injected intraspinally with SCs and a cyclic AMP analog
together with subcutaneous delivery of rolipram exhibited
white matter sparing, increased numbers of spinal and
supraspinal axons beyond the injury/transplant site and
improved locomotion.146
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 62
Prior to human clinical tests or trials, solo or combina-
tion methods for elevating cAMP levels after injury need to
be evaluated for safety and efficacy, at least in rodent mod-
els of SCI and preferably also in nonhuman primates.
Therapeutic windows of delivery of cAMP analogs need to
be defined and doses and methods of delivery established.
Modulation of small enzymes (GTPases) boosts CNS
axon regeneration and recovery of function after
dorsal hemisection
Many different extrinsic factors that impact upon axon
regeneration have common final pathways, many signaling
intracellularly via small enzymes that interact with guano-
sine triphosphate (GTP; a chemical compound that is used
as a source of energy during synthesis of proteins). This has
been shown for CS GAGs as well as MAG, OMgp, and Nogo-
A.148,149 These GTPases include Rho and Rac family mem-
bers. Injured spinal cords of adult rats contain increased
levels of message for at least 5 different small GTPases
including RhoA, RhoB, and Rac1.150 Rho and Rac GTPases
generally act antagonistically; while Rho family members
retard growth,Rac family members promote neurite growth
in vitro.151 Consequently,modulators of small GTPases have
been evaluated as methods for promoting CNS axon regen-
eration and functional recovery in animal models of SCI.
Rho GTPase protein is activated after SCI and inhibition
of Rho (using C3 botulinum toxin) promotes CNS axon
regeneration and a degree of functional recovery following
dorsal hemisection injury in adult rats.152 Rho kinase acts as
a downstream effector of Rho, and pharmacologic inhibi-
tion of Rho kinase promotes CNS axon regeneration fol-
lowing dorsal hemisection in adult rats.153
Improved cell-permeable inhibitors of Rho are currently
being tested. For example, BioAxone Therapeutic Inc. is
developing technologies to target Rho signaling. Strategies
to stimulate Rac in vivo remain to be developed. To date,
activators of Rac and inhibitors of Rho and Rho kinase have
neither been tested in rodent models of contusion injury
nor in any nonhuman primate models of SCI.
Other inhibitors of CNS axon regeneration intrinsic to
neurons likely exist, and with the advent of molecular
knockdown methods including RNA interference, attempts
to promote CNS axon regeneration through targeting of
regeneration-inhibiting genes and proteins may become
possible.
Overexpressing regeneration-promoting molecules
in neurons promotes CNS axon regeneration
As axons elongate during development, PNS and CNS
neurons express a range of genes154 including growth asso-
ciated protein 43 kDa (GAP-43) and cortical cytoskeleton-
associated protein 23 kDa (CAP-23). On maturation, most
neurons downregulate expression of these genes. After
injury to the PNS, neurons that re-extend axons re-express
many of these “regeneration-associated” genes.155–157 Injured
CNS neurons do sprout processes locally, and this is associ-
ated with mild expression of a limited set of regeneration-
associated genes,158 particularly when injury occurs close to
the cell body. CNS neurons that regenerate axons into
transplants of peripheral nerve express various regenera-
tion-associated genes158–161
In general, however, after injury to the CNS, neurons fail
to re-express the majority of these genes, and do not regen-
erate long distances. For example, following peripheral
transection, DRG neurons express GAP-43 in their regener-
ating peripheral projections but not in their nonregenerat-
ing central projections following central axotomy in dorsal
columns.162 It is therefore encouraging that overexpression
of regeneration-associated genes causes injured CNS neu-
rons to regenerate axons. For example, simultaneous over-
expression of GAP43 and CAP23 in transgenic mice causes
enhanced neurite growth from explanted DRG in vitro and
boosts regeneration of centrally projecting axons from lum-
bar DRG into peripheral nerve grafts implanted in thoracic
spinal cord.163
Experiments overexpressing regeneration-associated
genes in CNS neurons in nonhuman primates have not yet
been performed and to our knowledge, therapies specifi-
cally designed to boost expression of pro-regenerative
genes in neurons after SCI are not yet being considered for
human clinical trial.
A number of hurdles remain. In the combination strat-
egy described above,163 relatively few neurons regenerated
and there was no report of testing for recovery of function.
Future experiments may identify additional, more potent
regeneration-promoting genes. For example, novel regener-
ation-associated genes have been identified in neurons dur-
ing PNS164 and CNS regeneration. In addition, we have
recently identified a novel set of regeneration-associated
genes that are expressed by injured spinal neurons that
regenerate into grafts of SCs placed in transected adult rat
spinal cord.165 Future experiments are underway to identify
genes that potently promote neurite growth in cell culture
systems. Targeted upregulation of these growth-promoting
genes (eg, using viral vectors) may prove effective in pro-
moting CNS axon regeneration and functional recovery in
animal models of SCI.
Physical therapy enhances recovery of function after
SCI
Although we know of no evidence yet that physical ther-
apy or rehabilitation directly improves CNS axon regenera-
tion after SCI, environmental enrichment, physical therapy,
and motor training have been shown to improve limb func-
tion in animal models of SCI (including after transection166
and contusion167–169) and in humans with SCI.170–173
To date, very few studies have combined rehabilita-
tion/physical therapy with strategies for promoting CNS
axon regeneration and recovery of limb function. In one
recent study from our laboratory, following transection of
adult rat thoracic spinal cord, OEG were transplanted with
or without SC bridges.71 Motor activity was encouraged
63 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
through provision of motor enrichment housing (MEH): a
large, multilevel cage filled with ramps, textured surfaces,
and hanging food rewards. The return of hindlimb joint
movement was assessed weekly for 22 weeks starting 1
week postinjury and was compared between animals
housed in MEH and those maintained in basic housing (BH).
All rats recovered a small amount of hindlimb movement,
but recovery was not accelerated or enhanced by MEH.
Recovered hindlimb movements were, however, sustained
up to 22 weeks postinjury in most rats in MEH, whereas
most rats kept in BH progressively lost recovered hindlimb
movements after 9 weeks. Furthermore, MEH decreased
mortality, and improved health. We conclude that motor
rehabilitation can be of substantial benefit when using
transplantation strategies to treat SCI.
In the future it seems very likely that rehabilitation/phys-
ical therapy will play a key role in many strategies designed
to promote CNS axon regeneration and recovery of limb
function. These combination strategies will likely first be
tested in rodent, then primate models of SCI, and then, if
safe and efficacious, in human clinical trials.
TOWARDS THE FUTURE
In cases of anatomically complete injury in animal mod-
els, the degree of recovery of hindlimb movement obtained
by any single transplant therapy remains functionally slight.
In general, following transection and intervention of any
kind in adult rats, plantar placement and weight support on
hindlimbs during stepping is not consistently observed. This
includes: (1) transplantation of glia obtained from nasal
mucosa or olfactory bulb;26,68 (2) transplantation of activated
monocytes;79 (3) implantation of peripheral nerve grafts
secured across transection gaps with fibrin glue containing
acidic fibroblast growth factor;51 and (4) transplantation of
OEG, with or without SC bridges;71 and (5) implantation of
SC bridges and OEG with delivery of chondroitinase ABC.123
To our knowledge there exists only one study that reports
frequent plantar placement and weight-supported stepping
in adult rats with transection injuries.92 This study utilized
delayed transplantation of fetal tissue in combination with
neurotrophin delivery.
In cases of anatomically incomplete injury, the degree of
recovery witnessed in the open field is typically modest and
most studies remain to be reproduced independently.174
Replication is extremely desirable in order to determine the
general applicability of a therapy. Incomplete injuries are
notoriously variable and animals should be randomized to
treatment group, treated blind and evaluated blind. Where
possible, baseline testing should be performed prior to
intervention to ensure that groups do not differ one from
another initially. Where axon regeneration is evaluated,
stringent criteria should be applied to discriminate this
from sprouting or sparing.21
Many claims have been made as to the particular repar-
ative potential of transplants of a given cell type, including
SCs, OEG, monocytes, genetically modified fibroblasts, and
multiple types of progenitor cells. In many cases these
claims have been made relative to controls that were not
transplanted with cells, but relative to injection of
medium.63,107 Very few studies have directly compared dif-
ferent cell types within a single experiment,58 so it is very
difficult to know which cell type affords particular benefits
over others. In the future, additional control or comparison
groups should be included such as transplants of other cell
types.
Worryingly, some pro-regenerative therapies have been
shown to promote growth of sensory axons within the PNS
or CNS. This includes progenitor cells,175 neurotrophin ther-
apies,176 anti-inhibitor therapies,110 and regeneration-gene
overexpression therapies.163 In light of this, rigorous testing
for changes in nociception should take place in animal
models of SCI before moving to the human patient. This is
especially important as many humans with SCI rate neuro-
logic pain as one of the worst sequelae of SCI.177 Great care
should therefore be taken to ensure that any clinical ther-
apy does not induce neurological pain as a side effect.
CODA
Increasing numbers of experimental studies using ani-
mal models of SCI are resulting in reports of improvements
in CNS axon regeneration and recovery of limb function.
Combinations of these strategies in animal models and in
humans may lead to additive improvements in outcome
after SCI. Many of these combination strategies may involve
rehabilitation measures and, as clinical tests and trials pro-
ceed, it seems likely that the demand for physical therapists
with a good working knowledge of pro-repair strategies for
SCI will increase.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Supported by Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation
Research Consortium grants, NINDS 09923 and the Miami
Project to Cure Paralysis (to M.B.B). With thanks to Dr.
Caitlin Hill for suggestions for improving the manuscript
and Diana Masella for assistance with manuscript prepara-
tion.
REFERENCES
1 Horner PJ, Gage FH. Regenerating the damaged central
nervous system. Nature. 2000;407:963-970.
2 Dusart I, Schwab ME. Secondary cell death and the
inflammatory reaction after dorsal hemisection of the rat
spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci. 1994;6:712-724.
3 Hall ED, Springer JE. Neuroprotection and acute spinal
cord injury: a reappraisal. Neurorx. 2004;1:80-100.
4 Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC, Komon J, et al. Endogenous
repair after spinal cord contusion injuries in the rat. Exp
Neurol. 1997;148:453-463.
5 Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Rainteau O, Mettenleiter
TC, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. The injured spinal cord
spontaneously forms a new intraspinal circuit in adult
rats. Nat Neurosci. 2004;7:269-277.
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 64
6 Hayes KC. The use of 4-aminopyridine (fampridine) in
demyelinating disorders. CNS Drug Rev. 2004;10:295-
316.
7 Amador MJ, Guest JD. A critical appraisal of ongoing
experimental procedures in spinal cord injury. J Neurol
Phys Ther. 2005;29:70-86.
8 Bunge RP, Puckett WR, Hiester ED. Observations on the
pathology of several types of human spinal cord injury,
with emphasis on the astrocyte response to penetrating
injuries. Adv Neurol. 1997;72:305-15.
9 Guest JD, Hiester ED, Bunge RP. Demyelination and
Schwann cell response adjacent to injury epicenter cav-
ities following chronic human spinal cord injury. Exp
Neurol. 2005;192:384-393.
10 Bruce JH, Norenberg MD, Krydieh S, Puckett W, Marcillo
A, Dietrich D. Schwannosis: role of gliosis and proteogly-
can in human spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma. 2000;
17:781-788.
11 Jakeman LB, Guan Z, Wei P, et al. Traumatic spinal cord
injury produced by controlled contusion in mouse. J
Neurotrauma. 2000;17:299-319.
12 Stokes BT, Noyes DH, Behrmann DL. An electromechan-
ical spinal injury technique with dynamic sensitivity. J
Neurotrauma. 1992;9:187-195.
13 Gruner JA.A monitored contusion model of spinal cord
injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma. 1992;9:123-128.
14 Martin D, Schoenen J, Delree P, et al. Experimental acute
traumatic injury of the adult rat spinal cord by a subdural
inflatable balloon: methodology, behavioral analysis, and
histopathology. J Neurosci Res. 1992;32:539-550.
15 Fehlings MG, Tator CH. The relationships among the
severity of spinal cord injury, residual neurological func-
tion, axon counts, and counts of retrogradely labeled
neurons after experimental spinal cord injury. Exp
Neurol. 1995;132:220-228.
16 Fiford RJ, Bilston LE,Waite P, Lu J.A vertebral dislocation
model of spinal cord injury in rats. J Neurotrauma.
2004;21:451-458.
17 Xu XM, Guenard V, Kleitman N,Aebischer P, Bunge MB.A
combination of BDNF and NT-3 promotes supraspinal
axonal regeneration into Schwann cell grafts in adult rat
thoracic spinal cord. Exp Neurol. 1995;134:261-272.
18 Xu XM, Guenard V, Kleitman N, Bunge MB.Axonal regen-
eration into Schwann cell-seeded guidance channels
grafted into transected adult rat spinal cord. J Comp
Neurol. 1995;351:145-160.
19 Schnell L, Schwab ME. Axonal regeneration in the rat
spinal cord produced by an antibody against myelin-
associated neurite growth inhibitors. Nature. 1990;343:
269-272.
20 Levi AD, Dancausse H, Li X, Duncan S, Horkey L, Olivera
M. Peripheral nerve grafts promoting central nervous
system regeneration after spinal cord injury in the pri-
mate. J Neurosurg Spine. 2002; 96:197-205.
21 Steward O, Zheng B, Tessier-Lavigne M. False resurrec-
tions: distinguishing regenerated from spared axons in
the injured central nervous system. J Comp Neurol.
2003;459:1-8.
22 University of Alabama at Birmingham, Dept. of Physical
Medicine & Rehabilitation. Spinal Cord Injury Informa-
tion Network. 1996. Available at: http://www. spinal
cord. uab.edu.Accessed April 1, 2005.
23 Ye JH, House JD.Treatment of chronically injured spinal
cord with neurotrophic factors can promote axonal
regeneration from supraspinal neurons. Exp. Neurol.
1997;143:70-81.
24 von Meyenburg J, Brosamle C, Metz GA, Schwab ME.
Regeneration and sprouting of chronically injured corti-
cospinal tract fibers in adult rats promoted by NT-3 and
the mAb IN-1, which neutralizes myelin-associated neu-
rite growth inhibitors. Exp Neurol. 1998;154:583-594.
25 Kwon BK, Liu J, Messerer C, et al. Survival and regenera-
tion of rubrospinal neurons 1 year after spinal cord
injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:3246-3251.
26 Lu J,Feron F,Mackay-Sim A,Waite PM.Olfactory ensheath-
ing cells promote locomotor recovery after delayed
transplantation into transected spinal cord. Brain.
2002;125(Pt 1):14-21.
27 Keyvan-Fouladi N, Raisman G, Li Y. Functional repair of
the corticospinal tract by delayed transplantation of
olfactory ensheathing cells in adult rats. J Neurosci.
2003;23:9428-9434.
28 Shumsky JS,Tobias CA,Tumulo M, Long WD, Giszter SF,
Murray M. Delayed transplantation of fibroblasts geneti-
cally modified to secrete BDNF and NT-3 into a spinal
cord injury site is associated with limited recovery of
function. Exp Neurol. 2003;184:114-130.
29 Eidelberg E, Straehley D, Erspamer R, Watkins CJ.
Relationship between residual hindlimb-assisted loco-
motion and surviving axons after incomplete spinal cord
injuries. Exp Neurol. 1977:56:312-322.
30 Blight AR. Cellular morphology of chronic spinal cord
injury in the cat: analysis of myelinated axons by line-
sampling. Neuroscience. 1983;10:521-543.
31 Blight AR, Young W. Central axons in injured cat spinal
cord recover electrophysiological function following
remyelination by Schwann cells. J Neurol Sci. 1989;
91:15-34.
32 Ma M, Basso DM, Walters P, Stokes BT, Jakeman LB.
Behavioral and histological outcomes following graded
spinal cord contusion injury in the C57B1/6 mouse. Exp
Neurol. 2001;169:239-254.
33 Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. Graded histological
and locomotor outcomes after spinal cord contusion
using the NYU weight-drop device versus transection.
Exp Neurol. 1996;139:244-256.
34 Sroga JM, Jones TB, Kigerl KA, McGaughy VM, Popovich
PG. Rats and mice exhibit distinct inflammatory reac-
tions after spinal cord injury. J Comp Neurol. 2003;462:
223-240.
65 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
35 Tuszynski MH, Grill R, Jones LL, McKay HM, Blesch A.
Spontaneous and augmented growth of axons in the 
primate spinal cord: effects of local injury and nerve
growth factor-secreting cell grafts. J Comp Neurol.2002;
449:88-101.
36 Bresnahan JC, King JS, Martin GF, Yashon D. A neu-
roanatomical analysis of spinal cord injury in the rhesus
monkey (Macaca Mulatta). J Neurol Sci. 1976;28:521-
542.
37 Bresnahan JC.An electron-microscopic analysis of axonal
alterations following blunt contusion of the spinal cord
of the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta). J Neurol Sci.
1978;37:59-82.
38 Crowe MJ, Bresnahan JC, Shuman SL, Masters JN, Beattie
MS.Apoptosis and delayed degeneration after spinal cord
injury in rats and monkeys. Nat Med. 1997;3:73-76.
39 Iwanami A, Yamane J, Katoh H, et al. Establishment of
graded spinal cord injury model in a nonhuman primate:
the common marmoset. J Neurosci Res. 2005;80:172-
181.
40 Asher RA, Morgenstern DA, Moon LD, Fawcett JW.
Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans: inhibitory compo-
nents of the glial scar. Prog Brain Res. 2001;132:611-
619.
41 Caroni P. Neuro-regeneration: plasticity for repair and
adaptation. Essays Biochem. 1998;33:53-64.
42 Richardson PM, McGuinness UM,Aguayo AJ.Axons from
CNS neurons regenerate into PNS grafts. Nature.
1980;284:264-265.
43 Heibert GW, Khodarahmi K, McGraw J, Steeves JD,
Tetzlaff W. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor applied to
the motor cortex promotes sprouting of corticospinal
fibers but not regeneration into a peripheral nerve trans-
plant. J Neurosci Res. 2002;69:160-168.
44 Richardson PM, McGuinness UM, Aguayo AJ. Peripheral
nerve autografts to the rat spinal cord: studies with
axonal tracing methods. Brain Res. 1982;237:147-162.
45 Tetzlaff W, Kobayashi NR, Giehl KM, Tsui BJ, Cassar SL,
Bedard AM. Response of rubrospinal and corticospinal
neurons to injury and neurotrophins. Prog Brain Res.
1994;103:271-286.
46 Keirstead SA, Rasminsky M, Fukada Y, Carter DA,Aguayo
AJ,Vidal-Sanz M.Electrophysiologic responses in hamster
superior colliculus evoked by regenerating retinal
axons. Science. 1989;246:255-257.
47 Oudega M,Varon S, Hagg T. Regeneration of adult rat sen-
sory axons into intraspinal nerve grafts: promoting
effects of conditioning lesion and graft predegeneration.
Exp Neurol. 1994;129:194-206.
48 Oudega M, Hagg T. Nerve growth factor promotes regen-
eration of sensory axons into adult rat spinal cord. Exp
Neurol. 1996;140:218-229.
49 Oudega M, Hagg T. Neurotrophins promote regeneration
of sensory axons in the adult rat spinal cord. Brain Res.
1999;818:431-438.
50 Cheng H, Cao Y, Olson L. Spinal cord repair in adult para-
plegic rats: partial restoration of hind limb function.
Science. 1996;273:510-513.
51 Cheng H,Almstron S, Giminez-Llort L, et al. Gait analysis
of adult paraplegic rats after spinal cord repair. Exp
Neurol. 1997;148:544-557.
52 Lee YS, Hsiao I, Lin VW. Peripheral nerve grafts and aFGF
restore partial hindlimb function in adult paraplegic rats.
J Neurotrauma. 2002;19:1203-1216.
53 Lee YS, Lin CY, Robertson RT, Hsiao I, Lin VW. Motor
recovery and anatomical evidence of axonal regrowth in
spinal cord-repaired adult rats. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol. 2004;63:233-245.
54 Cheng H, Liao KK, Liao SF, Chuang TY, Shih YH. Spinal
cord repair with acidic fibroblast growth factor as a
treatment for a patient with chronic paraplegia. Spine.
2004;29:E284-288.
55 Fawcett JW, Keynes RJ. Peripheral nerve regeneration.
Annu Rev Neurosci. 1990;13:43-60.
56 Morrissey TK, Kleitman N, Bunge RP. Isolation and func-
tional characteristics of Schwann cells derived from
adult peripheral nerve. J Neuroscience. 1991;11:2433-
2442.
57 Xu XM, Chen A, Guenard V, Kleitman N, Bunge MB.
Bridging Schwann cell transplants promote axonal
regeneration from both the rostral and caudal stumps of
transected adult rat spinal cord. J Neurocytol. 1997;26:
1-16.
58 Takami T, Oudega M, Bates ML, Wood PM, Kleitman N,
Bunge MB. Schwann cell but not olfactory ensheathing
glia transplants improve hindlimb locomotor perfor-
mance in the moderately contused adult rat thoracic
spinal cord. J Neurosci. 2002;22:6670-6681.
59 Bamber NI, Li H, Lu X, Oudega M, Aebischer P, Xu XM.
Neurotrophins BDNF and NT-3 promote axonal re-entry
into the distal host spinal cord through Schwann cell-
seeded mini-channels. Eur J Neurosci. 2001;13:257-268.
60 Pinzon A, Calancie B, Oudega M, Noga BR. Conduction of
impulses by axons regenerated in a Schwann cell graft in
the transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord. J Neurosci
Res. 2001;64:533-541.
61 Menei P, Montero-Menei C, Whittemore SR, Bunge RP,
Bunge MB.Schwann cells genetically modified to secrete
human BDNF promote enhanced axonal regrowth
across transected adult rat spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci.
1998;10:607-621.
62 Chen A, Xu XM, Kleitman N, Bunge MB. Methylpredni-
solone administration improves axonal regeneration into
Schwann cell grafts in transected adult rat thoracic
spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 1996;138:261-276.
63 Ramon-Cueto A, Plant GW, Avila J, Bunge MB. Long-dis-
tance axonal regeneration in the transected adult rat
spinal cord is promoted by olfactory ensheathing glia
transplants. J Neurosci. 1998;18:3803-3815.
64 Guest JD, Rao A, Olson L, Bunge MB, Bunge RP.The abil-
ity of human Schwann cell grafts to promote regenera-
tion in the transected nude rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol.
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 66
1997;148:502-522.
65 Emery E, Li X, Brunschwig JP, Olson L, Levi AD. Assess-
ment of the malignant potential of mitogen stimulated
human Schwann cells. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 1999;4:107-
116.
66 Li Y,Field PM,Raisman G.Repair of adult rat corticospinal
tract by transplants of olfactory ensheathing glia.
Science. 1997;277:2000-2002.
67 Li Y, Field PM, Raisman G. Regeneration of adult rat corti-
cospinal axons induced by transplanted olfactory
ensheathing cells. J Neurosci. 1998;18:10514-10524.
68 Lu J, Feron F, Ho SM, Mackay-Sim A,Waite PM.Transplant-
ation of nasal olfactory tissue promotes partial recovery
in paraplegic adult rats. Brain Res. 2001;889:344-357.
69 Li Y, Decherchi P, Raisman G.Transplantation of olfactory
ensheathing cells into spinal cord lesions restores
breathing and climbing. J Neurosci. 2003;23:727-731.
70 Ramon-Cueto A, Cordero MI, Santos-Benito FF, Avila J.
Functional recovery of paraplegic rats and motor axon
regeneration in their spinal cords by olfactory ensheath-
ing glia. Neuron. 2000;25:425-435.
71 Moon LDF,Leasure JL,Gage FH,Bunge MB. Motor enrich-
ment decreases mortality and maintains recovered
hindlimb movement after thoracic spinal cord injury.
Manuscript submitted 2005.
72 Casas CE, Herrera LP, Corredor R, Margitich I, Kim K,
Guest JD. Non-human primate model of autologous
olfactory ensheathing glia transplantation following a
stereotaxic electrolytic lesion of the medullary pyramid.
Soc Neurosci Abstracts. 2004;184.5.
73 Bianco JI, Perry C, Harkin DG, Mackay-Sim A, Feron F.
Neurotrophin 3 promotes purification and proliferation
of olfactory ensheathing cells from human nose. Glia.
2004;45:111-123.
74 Barnett SC,Alexander CL, Iwashita Y, et al. Identification
of a human olfactory ensheathing cell that can effect
transplant-mediated remyelination of demyelinated CNS
axons. Brain. 2000;123(Pt 8):1581-1588.
75 Huang H,Chen L,Wang H,et al. Influence of patients’ age
on functional recovery after transplantation of olfactory
ensheathing cells into injured spinal cord injury. Chin
Med J (Engl). 2003;116:1488-1491.
76 Popovich PG, Hickey WF. Bone marrow chimeric rats
reveal the unique distribution of resident and recruited
macrophages in the contused rat spinal cord. J Neuro-
pathol Exp Neurol. 2001;60:676-685.
77 Popovich PG, Wei P, Stokes BT. Cellular inflammatory
response after spinal cord injury in Sprague-Dawley and
Lewis rats. J Comp Neurol. 1997;377:443-464.
78 George R,Griffin JW.Delayed macrophage responses and
myelin clearance during Wallerian degeneration in the
central nervous system: the dorsal radiculotomy model.
Exp Neurol. 1994;129:225-236.
79 Rapalino O, Lazarov-Spiegler O, Agranov E, et al.
Implantation of stimulated homologous macrophages
results in partial recovery of paraplegic rats. Nat Med.
1998;4:814-821.
80 Bomstein Y, Marder JB, Vitner K, et al. Features of skin-
coincubated macrophages that promote recovery from
spinal cord injury. J Neuroimmunol. 2003;142:10-16.
81 Popovich PG, van Rooijen N, Hickey WF, Preidis G,
McGaughy V. Hematogenous macrophages express CD8
and distribute to regions of lesion cavitation after spinal
cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2003;182:275-287.
82 Popovich PG, Guan Z, McGaughy V, Fisher L, Hickey WF,
Basso DM.The neuropathological and behavioral conse-
quences of intraspinal microglial/macrophage activa-
tion. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2002;61:623-633.
83 Popovich PG, Guan Z, Wei P, Huitinga I, van Rooijen N,
Stokes BT. Depletion of hematogenous macrophages
promotes partial hindlimb recovery and neuroanatomi-
cal repair after experimental spinal cord injury. Exp
Neurol. 1999;158:351-365.
84 Bregman BS, Kunkel-Bagden E, Reier PJ, Dai HN, McAtee
M, Gao D. Recovery of function after spinal cord injury:
mechanisms underlying transplant-mediated recovery of
function differ after spinal cord injury in newborn and
adult rats. Exp Neurol. 1993;123:3-16.
85 Reier PJ, Anderson DK, Thompson FJ, Stokes BT. Neural
tissue transplantation and CNS trauma: anatomical and
functional repair of the injured spinal cord. J Neuro-
trauma. 1992;9 Suppl 1:S223-248.
86 Stokes BT, Reier PJ. Fetal grafts alter chronic behavioral
outcome after contusion damage to the adult rat spinal
cord. Exp Neurol. 1992;116:1-12.
87 Reier PJ, Stokes BT,Thompson FJ,Anderson DK. Fetal cell
grafts into resection and contusion/compression injuries
of the rat and cat spinal cord.Exp Neurol. 1992;115:177-
188.
88 Houle JD, Skinner RD, Garcia-Rill E,Turner KL. Synaptic
evoked potentials from regenerating dorsal root axons
within fetal spinal cord tissue transplants. Exp Neurol.
1996;139:278-290.
89 Reier PJ, Anderson DK, Young W, Michel ME, Fessler R.
Workshop on intraspinal transplantation and clinical
application. J Neurotrauma. 1994;11:369-377.
90 Privat A, Mansour H, Geffard M. Transplantation of fetal
serotonin neurons into the transected spinal cord of
adult rats: morphological development and functional
influence. Prog Brain Res. 1988;78:155-166.
91 Ribotta MG,Provencher J,Feraboli-Lohnherr D,Rossignol
S, Privat A, Orsal D. Activation of locomotion in adult
chronic spinal rats is achieved by transplantation of
embryonic raphe cells reinnervating a precise lumbar
level. J Neurosci. 2000;20:5144-5152.
92 Coumans JV, Lin TT, Dai HN, et al. Axonal regeneration
and functional recovery after complete spinal cord tran-
section in rats by delayed treatment with transplants and
neurotrophins. J Neurosci. 2001;21:9334-9344.
93 Thompson FJ, Reier PJ, Uthman Mott S, et al. Neuro-phys-
iological assessment of the feasibility and safety of neural
tissue transplantation in patients with syringo-myelia. J
67 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
Neurotrauma. 2001;18:931-945.
94 Wirth ED III, Reier PJ, Fessler RG, et al. Feasibility and
safety of neural tissue transplantation in patients with
syringomyelia. J Neurotrauma. 2001;18:911-29.
95 Cao Q, Benton RL, Whittemore SR. Stem cell repair of
central nervous system injury. J Neurosci Res. 2002;68:
501-510.
96 Saporta S,Kim JJ,Willing AE,Fu ES,Davis CD,Sanberg PR.
Human umbilical cord blood stem cells infusion in
spinal cord injury: engraftment and beneficial influence
on behavior. J Hematother Stem Cell Res. 2003;12:271-
278.
97 Ankeny DP, McTigue DM, Jakeman LB. Bone marrow
transplants provide tissue protection and directional
guidance for axons after contusive spinal cord injury in
rats. Exp Neurol. 2004;190:17-31.
98 McDonald JW,Liu XZ,Qu Y,et al.Transplanted embryonic
stem cells survive, differentiate and promote recovery in
injured rat spinal cord. Nat Med. 1999;5: 1410-1412.
99 Stepanov GA, Karpenko DO, Aleksandrova MA, et al.
Xenotransplantation of stem/progenitor cells from
human fetal brain to adult rats with spinal trauma. Bull
Exp Biol Med. 2003;135:397-400.
100 Akesson E, Holmberg L, Jonhagen ME, et al A. Solid
human embryonic spinal cord xenografts in acute and
chronic spinal cord cavities: a morphological and func-
tional study. Exp Neurol. 2001;170:305-316.
101 Lu P, Jones LL,Snyder EY,Tuszynski MH.Neural stem cells
constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote
extensive host axonal growth after spinal cord injury.
Exp Neurol. 2003;181:115-129.
102 Liu S, Qu Y, Stewart TJ, et al. Embryonic stem cells differ-
entiate into oligodendrocytes and myelinate in culture
and after spinal cord transplantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2000;97:6126-6131.
103 Ogawa Y, Sawamoto K, Miyata T, et al.Transplantation of
in vitro-expanded fetal neural progenitor cells results in
neurogenesis and functional recovery after spinal cord
contusion injury in adult rats. J Neurosci Res. 2002;69:
925-933.
104 Hill CE, Proschel C, Noble M, et al. Acute transplantation
of glial-restricted precursor cells into spinal cord contu-
sion injuries: survival, differentiation, and effects on
lesion environment and axonal regeneration. Exp
Neurol. 2004;190:289-310.
105 Han SS, Kang DY, Mujtaba T, Rao MS, Fischer I. Grafted
lineage-restricted precursors differentiate exclusively
into neurons in the adult spinal cord. Exp Neurol. 2002;
177:360-375.
106 Cao QL, Howard RM, Dennison JB, Whittemore SR.
Differentiation of engrafted neuronal-restricted precur-
sor cells is inhibited in the traumatically injured spinal
cord. Exp Neurol. 2002;177:349-359.
107 Iwanami A, Kaneto S, Nakamura M, et al. Transplantation
of human neural stem cells for spinal cord injury in pri-
mates. J Neurosci Res. 2005;80:182-190.
108 Wildenfalk J, Lundstromer K, Jubran M, Brene S, Olson L.
Neurotrophic factors and receptors in the immature and
adult spinal cord after mechanical injury or kainic acid.
J Neurosci. 2001;21:3457-3475.
109 Liebl DJ, Huang W,Young W, Parada LF. Regulation of Trk
receptors following contusion of the rat spinal cord.Exp
Neurol. 2001;167:15-26.
110 Bradbury EJ, Khemani S, King VR, Priestley JV, McMahon
SB. NT-3 promotes growth of lesioned adult rat sensory
axons ascending in the dorsal columns of the spinal
cord. Eur J Neurosci. 1999;11:3873-3883.
111 Guest JD, Hesse D, Schnell L, Schwab ME, Bunge MB,
Bunge RP. Influence of IN-1 antibody and acidic FGF-fib-
rin glue on the response of injured corticospinal tract
axons to human Schwann cell grafts. J Neurosci Res.
1997;50:888-905.
112 Liu Y, Himes T, Murray M, Tessler A, Fischer I. Grafts of
BDNF-producing fibroblasts rescue axotomized rubro-
spinal neurons and prevent their atrophy. Exp Neurol.
2002;178:150-164.
113 Grill R, Murai K, Blesch A, Gage FH, Tuszynski MH.
Cellular delivery of neurotrophin-3 promotes corti-
cospinal axonal growth and partial functional recovery
after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 1997;17:5560-5572.
114 Liu Y, Kim D, Himes T, et al Transplants of fibroblasts
genetically modified to express BDNF promote regener-
ation of adult rat rubrospinal axons and recovery of fore-
limb function. J Neurosci. 1999;19:4370-4387.
115 Tuszynski MH, Grill R, Jones LL, McKay HM, Blesch A.
Spontaneous and augmented growth of axons in the pri-
mate spinal cord: effects of local injury and nerve
growth factor-secreting cell grafts. J Comp Neurol.2002;
449:88-101
116 Apfel SC. Is the therapeutic application of neurotrophic
factors dead? Ann Neurol. 2002;51:8-11.
117 Shearer MC, Fawcett JW. The astrocyte/meningeal cell
interface-a barrier to successful nerve regeneration? Cell
Tissue Res. 2001;305:267-273.
118 Silver J,Miller JH.Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat
Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:146-156.
119 Moon LD, Asher RA, Rhodes KE, Fawcett JW.
Regeneration of CNS axons back to their target follow-
ing treatment of adult rat brain with chondroitinase ABC.
Nat Neurosci. 2001;4:465-466.
120 Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, et al. Chondroitinase
ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal cord
injury. Nature. 2002;416:636-640.
121 Yick LW,Wu W, So KF,Yip HK, Shum DK. Chondroitinase
ABC promotes axonal regeneration of Clarke’s neurons
after spinal cord injury. Neurol Report. 2000;11:1063-
1067.
122 Chau CH, Shum DK, Li H, et al. Chondroitinase ABC
enhances axonal regrowth through Schwann cell-seeded
guidance channels after spinal cord injury. FASEB J.
2004;18:194-196.
Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy 68
123 Fouad K, Schnell L, Bunge MB, Schwab ME, Liebscher T,
Pearse DD. Combining Schwann cell bridges and olfac-
tory-ensheathing glia grafts with chondroitinase pro-
motes locomotor recovery after complete transection of
the spinal cord. J Neurosci. 2005;25:1169-1178.
124 Caggiano AO, Zimber MP, Ganguly A, Blight AR, Gruskin
EA. Chondroitinase ABCI improves locomotion and blad-
der function following contusion injury of the rat spinal
cord. J Neurotrauma. 2005;22:226-239.
125 Seikagaku Annual Report 2003. Available at: http://
www.seikagaku.co.jp/annual/2003/pdf/ar03_03.pdf.
Accessed April 14, 2005.
126 Schwab ME. Nogo and axon regeneration. Curr Opin
Neurobiol. 2004;14:118-124.
127 Schnell L, Schwab ME. Sprouting and regeneration of
lesioned corticospinal tract fibres in the adult rat spinal
cord. Eur J Neurosci. 1993;5:1156-1171.
128 Bregman BS, Kunkel-Bagden E, Schnell L, Dai HN, Gao D,
Schwab ME. Recovery from spinal cord injury mediated
by antibodies to neurite growth inhibitors. Nature.
1995;378:498-501.
129 Schnell L, Schneider R, Kolbeck R, Barde YA, Schwab ME.
Neurotrophin-3 enhances sprouting of corticospinal
tract during development and after adult spinal cord
lesion. Nature. 1994;367:170-173.
130 Thallmair M, Metz GA, Z’Graggen WJ, Raineteau O, Kartje
GL, Schwab ME. Neurite growth inhibitors restrict plas-
ticity and functional recovery following corticospinal
tract lesions. Nat Neurosci. 1998;1:124-131.
131 Z’Graggen WJ, Metz GA, Kartje GL,Thallmair M, Schwab
ME.Functional recovery and enhanced corticofugal plas-
ticity after unilateral pyramidal tract lesion and blockade
of myelin-associated neurite growth inhibitors in adult
rats. J Neurosci. 1998;18:4744-4757.
132 Fouad K, Klusman I, Schwab ME. Regenerating corti-
cospinal fibers in the Marmoset (Callitrix jacchus) after
spinal cord lesion and treatment with the anti-Nogo-A
antibody IN-1. Eur J Neurosci. 2004;20:2479-2482.
133 Wiessner C, Bareyre FM,Allegrini PR, et al. Anti-Nogo-A
antibody infusion 24 hours after experimental stroke
improved behavioral outcome and corticospinal plastic-
ity in normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive
rats. Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003;23:154-165.
134 Schnell L, Liebscher T,Weinmann O,Schneider R,Scholl J,
Schnell DM. Increased regeneration and functional
recovery in rats treated with antibodies to Nogo-A and in
Nogo-A knockout mice. Soc Neurosci Abstracts. 2004:
43.11.
135 Chierzi S, Strettoi E, Cenni MC, Maffei L. Optic nerve
crush:axonal responses in wild-type and bcl-2 transgenic
mice. J Neurosci. 1999;19:8367-8376.
136 Oudega M,Rosano C,Sadi D,Wood PM,Schwab ME,Hagg
T. Neutralizing antibodies against neurite growth
inhibitor NI-35/250 do not promote regeneration of sen-
sory axons in the adult rat spinal cord. Neuroscience.
2000;100:873-883.
137 Merkler D, Metz Ga, Raineteau O, Dietz V, Schwab ME,
Fouad K. Locomotor recovery in spinal cord-injured rats
treated with an antibody neutralizing the myelin-associ-
ated neurite growth inhibitor Nogo-A. J Neurosci.
2001;21:3665-3673.
138 GrandPre T, Li S, Strittmatter SM. Nogo-66 receptor antag-
onist peptide promotes axonal regeneration. Nature.
2002;417:547-551.
139 Li S, Strittmatter SM. Delayed systemic Nogo-66 receptor
antagonist promotes recovery from spinal cord injury. J
Neurosci. 2003;23:4219-4227.
140 Cao Y, Shumsky JS, Sabol MA, Kushner RA, Tessler A,
Strittmatter S. Nogo-66 receptor antagonist peptide
(NEP1-40) promotes functional recovery after spinal
cord injury. Soc Neurosci Abstracts. 2004:185.13.
141 Cai D, Qiu J, Cao Z, McAtee M, Bregman BS, Filbin MT.
Neuronal cyclic AMP controls the developmental loss in
ability of axons to regenerate. J Neurosci. 2001;21:4731-
4739.
142 Qiu J,Cai D,Dai H,et al.Spinal axon regeneration induced
by elevation of cyclic AMP. Neuron. 2002;34: 895-903.
143 Neumann S, Bradke F, Tessier-Lavigne M, Basbaum AI.
Regeneration of sensory axons within the injured spinal
cord induced by intraganglionic cAMP elevation.
Neuron. 2002;34:885-893.
144 Lu P, Yang H, Jones LL, Filbin MT, Tuszynski MH.
Combinatorial therapy with neurotrophins and cAMP
promotes axonal regeneration beyond sites of spinal
cord injury. J Neurosci. 2004;24:6402-6409.
145 Bhatt DH, Otto SJ, Depoister B, Fetcho JR. Cyclic AMP-
induced repair of zebrafish spinal circuits. Science.
2004;305:254-258.
146 Pearse DD, Pereira FC, Marcillo AE, Bates et al. cAMP and
Schwann cells promote axonal growth and functional
recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat Med. 2004;10: 610-
616.
147 Nikulina E,Tidwell JL,Dai HN,Bregman BS,Filbin MT.The
phosphodiesterase inhibitor rolipram delivered after a
spinal cord lesion promotes axonal regeneration and
functional recovery. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:
8786-8790.
148 Jain A, Brady-Kalnay SM, Bellamkonda RV. Modulation of
Rho GTPase activity alleviates chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycan-dependent inhibition of neurite extension. J
Neurosci Res. 2004;77:299-307.
149 Schweigreiter R,Walmsley AR, Niederost B, et al.Versican
V2 and the central inhibitory domain of Nogo-A inhibit
neurite growth via p75NTR/NgR-independent pathways
that converge at RhoA. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004;27:163-
174.
150 Erschbamer MK, Hofstetter CP, Olson L. RhoA, RhoB,
RhoC,Rac1,Cdc42,and Tc10 mRNA levels in spinal cord,
sensory ganglia, and corticospinal tract neurons and
long-lasting specific changes following spinal cord
injury. J Comp Neurol. 2005; 484;224-233.
69 Journal of Neurological Physical Therapy Vol. 29  •  No. 2  •  2005
151 Niederost B, Oertle T, Fritsche J, McKinney RA, Bandtlow
CE. Nogo-A and myelin-associated glycoprotein mediate
neurite growth inhibition by antagonistic regulation of
RhoA and Rac1. J Neurosci. 2002;22: 10368-10376.
152 Dubreuil CI, Winton MJ, McKerracher L. Rho activation
patterns after spinal cord injury and the role of activated
Rho in apoptosis in the central nervous system. J Cell
Biol. 2003;162:233-243.
153 Fournier AE, Takizawa BT, Strittmatter SM. Rho kinase
inhibition enhances axonal regeneration in the injured
CNS. J Neurosci. 2003;23:1416-1423.
154 Bulsara KR, Iskandar BJ,Villavicencio AT, Skene JH.A new
millenium for spinal cord regeneration: growth-associ-
ated genes. Spine. 2002;27:1946-1949.
155 Tetzlaff W,Alexander SW, Miller FD, Bisby MA. Response
of facial and rubrospinal neurons to axotomy:changes in
mRNA expression for cytoskeletal proteins and GAP-43.
J Neurosci. 1991;11:2528-2544.
156 Woolf CJ, Reynolds ML, Molander C, O’Brien C, Lindsay
RM, Benowitz LI.The growth-associated protein GAP-43
appears in dorsal root ganglion cells and in the dorsal
horn of the rat spinal cord following peripheral nerve
injury. Neurosci. 1990;34:465-478.
157 Tetzlaff W, Zwiers H, Lederis K, Cassar L, Bisby MA.
Axonal transport and localization of B-50/GAP-43-like
immunoreactivity in regenerating sciatic and facial
nerves of the rat. J Neurosci. 1989;9:1303-1313.
158 Mason MR, Lieberman AR, Grenningloh G,Anderson PN.
Transcriptional upregulation of SCG10 and CAP-23 is
correlated with regeneration of the axons of peripheral
and central neurons in vivo. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2002;
20:595-615.
159 Chaisuksunt V, Campbell G, Zhang Y, Schachner M,
Lieberman AR,Anderson PN. Expression of regeneration-
related molecules in injured and regenerating striatal
and nigral neurons. J Neurocytol. 2003;32:161-183.
160 Chaisuksunt V, Zhang Y,Anderson PN, et al.Axonal regen-
eration from CNS neurons in the cerebellum and brain-
stem of adult rats: correlation with the patterns of
expression and distribution of messenger RNAs for L1,
CHL1, c-jun and growth-associated protein-43. Neurosci-
ence. 2000;100:87-108.
161 Campbell G,Hutchins K,Winterbottom J,Grenningloh G,
Lieberman AR, Anderson PN. Upregulation of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by intrinsic CNS neurons
regenerating axons into peripheral nerve grafts. Exp
Neurol. 2005;193:340-347.
162 Chong MS, Woolf CJ, Turmaine M, Emson PC, Anderson
PN. Intrinsic versus extrinsic factors in determining the
regeneration of the central processes of rat dorsal root
ganglion neurons: the influence of a peripheral nerve
graft. J Comp Neurol. 1996;370:97-104.
163 Bomze HM, Bulsara KR, Iskandar BJ, Caroni P, Skene JH.
Spinal axon regeneration evoked by replacing two
growth cone proteins in adult neurons. Nat Neurosci.
2001;4:38-43.
164 Costigan M, Befort K, Karchewski L, et al. Replicate high-
density rat genome oligonucleotide microarrays reveal
hundreds of regulated genes in the dorsal root ganglion
after peripheral nerve injury. BMC Neurosci. 2002;3:16.
165 Moon LDF, Torres-Munoz JE, Petito CK, et al. Identifica-
tion of genes expressed by laser captured spinal cord
neurons regenerating an axon into a Schwann cell bridge
transplanted after thoracic transection. In press. Society
for Neuroscience Abstracts 2005.
166 De Leon RD, Hodgson JA, Roy RR, Edgerton VR.
Locomotor capacity attributable to step training versus
spontaneous recovery after spinalization in adult cats. J
Neurophysiol. 1998;79:1329-1340.
167 Lankhorst AJ, ter Laak MP, van Laar TJ, et al. Effects of
enriched housing on functional recovery after spinal
cord contusive injury in the adult rat. J Neurotrauma.
2001;18:203-215.
168 Van Meeteren NL, Eggers R, Lankhorst AJ, Gispen WH,
Hamers FP. Locomotor recovery after spinal cord contu-
sion injury in rats is improved by spontaneous exercise.
J Neurotrauma. 2004; 20:1029-1037.
169 Hutchinson KJ, Gomez-Pinilla F, Crowe MJ,Ying Z, Basso
DM.Three exercise paradigms differentially improve sen-
sory recovery after spinal cord contusion in rats. Brain.
2004;127:1403-1414.
170 Wernig A, Muller S. Laufband locomotion with body
weight support improved walking in persons with
severe spinal cord injuries.Paraplegia.1992;30:229-238.
171 Behrman AL, Harkema SJ. Locomotor training after
human spinal cord injury: a series of case studies. Phys
Ther. 2000;80:688-700.
172 Field-Fote EC,Tepavac D. Improved intralimb coordina-
tion in people with incomplete spinal cord injury fol-
lowing training with body weight support and electrical
stimulation. Phys Ther. 2002;82:707-715.
173 McDonald JW, Becker D, Sadowsky CL, Jane JA Sr,
Conturo TE, Schultz LM. Late recovery following spinal
cord injury. Case report and review of the literature. J.
Neurosurg. 2002;97:252-265.
174 Kleitman N.Keeping promises: translating basic research
into new spinal cord injury therapies. J Spinal Cord
Med. 2004;27:311-318.
175 Hofstetter CP,Holmstrom NA,Lilja JA,et al. Allodynia lim-
its the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem cell grafts;
directed differentiation improves outcome. Nat
Neurosci. 2005;8:346-353.
176 Romero MI, Rangappa N, Li L, Lightfoot E, Garry MG,
Smith GM. Extensive sprouting of sensory afferents and
hyperalgesia induced by conditional expression of nerve
growth factor in the adult spinal cord. J Neurosci.
2000;20:4435-4445.
177 Widerstrom-Noga EG,Turk DC.Types and effectiveness
of treatments used by people with chronic pain associ-
ated with spinal cord injuries: influence of pain and
psychosocial characteristics. Spinal Cord. 2003;41:600-
609.
