original article© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
Molecular Therapy  vol. 18 no. 10, 1769–1777 oct. 2010 1769
Tenascin-C (TNC), a major component of the  extracellular 
matrix, is strongly upregulated after injuries of the central 
nervous system (CNS) but its role in tissue repair is not 
understood. Both regeneration promoting and inhibit-
ing roles of TNC have been proposed considering its 
abilities to both support and restrict neurite outgrowth 
in vitro. Here, we show that spontaneous recovery of 
locomotor functions after spinal cord injury is impaired 
in adult TNC-deficient (TNC–/–) mice in comparison to 
wild-type (TNC+/+) mice. The impaired recovery was 
associated with attenuated excitability of the plantar 
Hoffmann reflex (H-reflex), reduced glutamatergic input, 
reduced sprouting of monaminergic axons in the lumbar 
spinal cord and enhanced post-traumatic degeneration 
of corticospinal axons. The degeneration of corticospi-
nal axons in TNC–/– mice was normalized to TNC+/+ 
levels by application of the alternatively spliced TNC 
fibronectin type III homologous domain D (fnD). Finally, 
overexpression of TNC-fnD via adeno-associated virus in 
wild-type mice improved locomotor recovery, increased 
monaminergic axons sprouting, and reduced lesion scar 
volume after spinal cord injury. The functional efficacy 
of the viral-mediated TNC indicates a potentially useful 
approach for treatment of spinal cord injury.
Received 20 May 2010; accepted 28 May 2010; published online  
6 July 2010. doi:10.1038/mt.2010.133
IntroductIon
Lack of regeneration in the mature central nervous system (CNS) 
of mammals is attributed to the prevalence of neurite outgrowth 
inhibitory over conducive molecules. Several CNS myelin-
 associated inhibitors have been identified and characterized: 
Nogo-A,1 myelin-associated glycoprotein,2 oligodendrocyte myelin 
glycoprotein,3 semaphorin 3A,4 chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans,5 
and tenascin-R.6 Enzymatic degradation of the chondroitin  sulfate 
moiety of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans improves axon regen-
eration7 after spinal cord injury in adult rats, indicating a prominent 
role of these extracellular matrix  constituents in preventing axonal 
regeneration.
A major component of the extracellular matrix is the 
 glycoprotein tenascin-C (TNC), which is expressed by mature and 
immature astrocytes, radial glia, meningeal fibroblasts,  subsets 
of neurons, and Schwann cells.8–11 TNC expression is upregu-
lated by glial cells following CNS trauma,10 as well as by neurons 
after exposure to excitotoxic agents or induction of long-term 
potentiation.12,13 TNC has been implicated not only in enhance-
ment of neurite outgrowth and polarity of some neurons in vitro, 
but also in inhibition of other neuronal cell types.14–16 TNC  inhibits 
outgrowth when offered as a sharp substrate boundary abutting 
onto a neurite outgrowth conducive environment.17 These dual 
properties have been assigned to different splice variants of TNC18 
and molecular epitopes within those splice variants.14,16,19–23
Little is known about the in vivo functional role of TNC after 
CNS lesions. In this study, we studied a TNC-deficient mouse, 
which has normal gross anatomy of the CNS.24 We found that 
compression lesion of the spinal cord of adult mice leads to 
reduced functional outcome, and a more pronounced dying back 
of severed corticospinal axons in TNC–/– compared to TNC+/+ 
mice. This axonal retraction was reduced by application of the 
alternatively spliced fibronectin type III homologous domain D 
(fnD) to the injured spinal cord of TNC–/– mice. Overexpression 
of fnD by an adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector promoted the 
locomotor functional and morphological recovery in wild-type 
mice after compression spinal cord injury. These results indicate 
that TNC promotes spinal cord regeneration.
results
locomotor recovery of tnc–/– mice is inferior to that 
of tnc+/+ littermates after spinal cord injury
To evaluate the role of TNC in regeneration after spinal cord 
injury, we first compared locomotor recovery after compres-
sion injury between TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice using the Basso 
Mouse Score (BMS) rating scale25 and an objective numerical 
measure of the plantar stepping abilities, the foot-stepping angle 
during beam walking.6 Locomotor performance of TNC–/– mice 
The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Melitta Schachner, W.M. Keck Center, 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA. E-mail: schachner@biology.rutgers.edu
The Extracellular Matrix Glycoprotein Tenascin-C 
Is Beneficial for Spinal Cord Regeneration
Jian Chen1, Hyun Joon Lee2, Igor Jakovcevski2, Ronak Shah1, Neha Bhagat1, Gabriele Loers2,  
Hsing-Yin Liu3, Sally Meiners3, Grit Taschenberger4, Sebastian Kügler4, Andrey Irintchev2,5  
and Melitta Schachner1,2
1W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience, Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, 
New Jersey, USA; 2Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany; 
3UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA; 4DFG Research Center Molecular 
Physiology of the Brain (CMPB) at Department of Neurology, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany; 5Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany
1770 www.moleculartherapy.org  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
before injury was similar to that of TNC+/+ mice (Figure 1), in 
agreement with previous observations that TNC–/– mice have 
no apparent motor deficits.26 One week after compression injury, 
both TNC+/+ and TNC–/– mice had a severe decline in the 
BMS score and a prominent increase in the foot-stepping angle 
(Figure 1a,b). During the 12-week observation period, locomo-
tor abilities recovered to a moderate degree in both genotypes, 
but this recovery was more impaired in TNC–/– mice in com-
parison to their TNC+/+ littermates (Figure 1). Group mean 
values differed statistically only for the BMS score 12 weeks 
after injury (Figure 1a). However, analysis of recovery indexes, 
which estimate gain of function after the first week as a frac-
tion of the functional loss induced by the injury in individual 
animals,6 revealed significant differences for both parameters at 
6 and 12 weeks after injury (Figure 1c,d). These results indicate 
an adverse effect of TNC ablation on hindlimb locomotion after 
spinal cord injury.
reduced H-reflex activity in tnc–/– mice versus 
tnc+/+ littermates after spinal cord injury
In addition to assessment of locomotor recovery, we analyzed the 
plantar H-reflex (Hoffmann reflex), an electrically elicited analog of 
the spinal stretch reflex providing information about the  functional 
properties of Ia afferents and homonymous α-motoneurons. 
Before injury, the H-reflex responses were strongly reduced in 
both TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice when the stimulation frequency 
was increased stepwise from baseline  frequency (0.1 Hz) to 5 Hz, 
a phenomenon known as rate depression (Figure 2). One week 
after injury, the rate depression was severely reduced in both 
genotypes (Figure 2). At later time points, 3–12 weeks, the rate 
sensitivity declined further, as compared with 1 week, in TNC+/+ 
mice, but not in TNC–/– mice (Figure 2). Thus, reflex excitability 
upon repetitive stimulation was significantly reduced in TNC–/– 
mice compared with TNC+/+ littermates at 6 and 12 weeks, which 
is consistent with previous locomotor recovery observations. 
Previous work in rats and mice has shown that reduced reflex 
excitability is associated with reduced locomotor recovery.27 Thus, 
our combined observations suggest that TNC deficiency prevents 
functionally favorable changes in reflex excitability with time after 
injury. In contrast to TNC–/– mice, mice deficient in tenascin-R, a 
TNC-related extracellular matrix molecule, show both improved 
locomotor recovery and enhanced reflex excitability compared 
with wild-type littermates after compression spinal cord injury.6,27
reduced afferent input to lamina VII in tnc–/– mice 
versus tnc+/+ littermates after spinal cord injury
The degree of locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury is largely 
determined by preservation and functionality of primary afferent 
inputs.28 We therefore investigate, whether some aspects of spinal 
cord connectivity are altered in TNC–/– mice. We analyzed vesicu-
lar glutamate transporter 1 (VGLUT1)+ synaptic terminals, which 
are derived from medium- to large-sized neurons in the dorsal 
root ganglia and convey mechano- and proprioceptive information 
to the spinal cord.29 We selected three areas for analysis in which 
VGLUT1+ terminal densities were prominent: the Clarke’s column, 
which receives proprioceptive information (Figure 3a,b), an adja-
cent part of lamina VII, an area in the spinal cord containing, among 
0
H
/M
 ra
tio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Intact
TNC+/+ (7) (7)
TNC−/− (9) (9)
(6)
(9)
(6)
(7)
(4)
(5)
***
*
**
1 week 3 weeks 6 weeks 12 weeks
1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4
Stimulation frequency (Hz)
5 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5
Figure 2 rate depression of the Hoffmann reflex at different time 
points after spinal cord injury in tnc–/– and tnc+/+ mice. Shown 
are mean values (±SEM) of H/M ratios at different stimulation frequencies 
before operation and 1, 3, 6, and 12 weeks after spinal cord injury. At 6 
and 12 weeks after injury, the H/M ratios in TNC–/– mice are significantly 
lower than in TNC+/+ littermates at high frequencies (analysis of vari-
ance for repeated measurements with Tukey’s post hoc test, *P < 0.05). 
Number of animals are indicated in parenthesis. TNC, tenascin-C.
Foot-stepping angle
BMS score Foot-stepping angle
TNC+/+ (n = 7)
TNC−/− (n = 8)
Weeks after SCI
de
gr
ee
s
0 3 6 9 12
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
Recovery time-period
R
ec
ov
er
y 
in
de
x 
(%
)
6 weeks 12 weeks
Recovery time-period
a b
c d
6 weeks 12 weeks
*
*
*
*
Weeks after SCI
BMS score
TNC+/+
TNC−/−
0
2
4
6
8
3 6 9 12
*
Figure 1 Functional recovery after compression spinal cord injury in 
tnc–/– and tnc+/+ mice estimated by Basso Mouse score (BMs) 
rating and foot-stepping angle. Mean values (±SEM) of (a) BMS scores 
and (b) foot-stepping angles before surgery (day 0) and at 1, 3, 6, and 
12 weeks after injury. Recovery indexes (mean values ± SEM) calculated 
from individual animal values for (c) BMS score and (d) foot-stepping angle 
at 6 and 12 weeks after injury. Numbers of animals per group are indi-
cated in c. Asterisks indicate significant differences between group mean 
values at a given time period (one-way analysis of variance for repeated 
measurements with Tukey’s post hoc test, P < 0.05). TNC, tenascin-C.
Molecular Therapy  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 1771
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
other neurons, last-order interneurons, i.e., innervating motoneu-
rons (Figure 3a,c) and the motoneuron region, lamina IX, where 
proprio- and mechanoreceptors form contacts predominantly on 
motoneuron dendrites (Figure 3a,d). Analysis of TNC+/+ mice 12 
weeks after injury revealed a significant, compared with noninjured 
mice, decline in the terminal densities in Clarke’s column and lamina 
VII, and, interestingly, a strong increase in lamina IX (Figure 3e–g). 
Similar injury-related changes were found in TNC–/– mice with 
one prominent exception: a severe reduction of VGLUT1+ boutons 
in lamina VII compared with both noninjured TNC–/– mice and 
injured TNC+/+ mice (Figure 3f). This genotype-related difference 
indicates that TNC ablation leads to area-specific deficits in afferent 
inputs to the injured spinal cord.
reduced regrowth/sprouting of monaminergic 
and cst axons in tnc–/– versus tnc+/+ littermates 
after spinal cord injury
The deficit in the glutamatergic innervation of lamina VII in 
TNC–/– mice suggested that absence of TNC in the injured spinal 
cord has a negative impact on axonal survival and/or sprouting. 
To further analyze this possibility, we examined monaminergic 
(tyrosine hydroxylase-positive, TH+) axons in the lumbar  spinal 
cord. These axons often survive after thoracic compression or 
contusion injuries and are able to regrow and sprout.30 In support 
of this view, we found a dramatic deficit in TH+ axonal innerva-
tion of the lumbar spinal cord of injured TNC–/– mice compared 
with TNC+/+ mice (Figure 4). Considering that the degree of 
monaminergic innervation of the lumbar spinal cord is an impor-
tant determinant of locomotor abilities after spinal cord injury in 
rats and mice,31–33 we conclude that the observed axonal deficit 
accounts, at least in part, for the inferior functional recovery in 
TNC–/– mice.
In addition to unmyelinated monaminergic fibers, we exam-
ined corticospinal tract (CST) axons to evaluate the response 
of large myelinated axons to spinal cord injury. The proximal 
segments of these axons degenerate rapidly, within hours after 
injury, and thus retract from the lesion site by several hundred 
micrometers.34,35 We analyzed this “dying back” by measuring 
the distance between the tips of the anterogradely fluoro-ruby-
labeled axons and the center of the lesion site (Figure 5). In 
TNC+/+ mice, this distance was about 400 µm at 1 week after 
injury, and it did not change at 2 weeks as well as 30 days after 
injury. Similar retraction was found at 1 and 2 weeks after 
injury in TNC–/– mice. At 30 days, however, the distance in 
TNC–/– was more than doubled compared with the previous 
time points. Thus, TNC deficiency leads to a delayed second-
ary axonal degeneration. Combined, our findings support the 
300 µm
a
e f g
b
c
d
30 µm
30 µm
30 µm
0
2
4
6
8
TNC+/+ TNC−/−
*
*#
0
2
4
6
8
10
TNC+/+ TNC−/−
*
*
#
TNC+/+
0
D
en
si
ty
 (×
10
3 /m
m
2 )
5
10
15
20
TNC−/−
*
*
12 weeks
Intact
Figure 3 Immunohistochemical analysis of VGlut1+ terminals in 
the spinal cord of intact and injured tnc–/– and tnc+/+ mice. 
(a) A representative section of the spinal cord of a TNC+/+ mouse shows 
the distribution of VGLUT1+ puncta. Digital images of VGLUT1+ termi-
nals in the (b) Clarke’s column, (c) medial lamina VII, and (d) lamina IX 
obtained at high magnification (insets b, c, d) were used for estimation 
of terminal densities (number of puncta per unit area). Mean densities 
(±SEM) of terminals in the three areas in injured and intact TNC–/– 
(n  = 5) and TNC+/+ mice (n = 4) are shown in e–g. Six sections 250 µm 
apart were analyzed per animal. Asterisks indicate differences between 
noninjured and injured mice of the same genotype, cross-hatches 
denote differences between intact or injured TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice 
(P < 0.05, two-sided t-test for independent samples). TNC, tenascin-C; 
VGLUT1, vesicular glutamate transporter 1.
LS
C
R
250 µm
200 µm200 µm
a b
TNC+/+
0
N
um
be
r o
f a
xo
ns
20
10
30
40
TNC−/−
*
c
d
Figure 4 Analysis of monaminergic axons in the lumbar spinal cord 
of tnc–/– and tnc+/+ mice 12 weeks after injury. Representative 
images of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+) fibers in (a) TNC+/+ 
and (b) TNC–/– mice. (c) Mean numbers (±SEM) of TH+ axons in four 
TNC+/+ and three TNC–/– mice. Every 5th parasagittal serial section 
from the spinal cord of each animal was analyzed. (d) The axon count-
ing paradigm is illustrated in the Neurolucida drawing. Asterisk indicates 
significant difference between TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice (P < 0.05, two-
sided t-test for independent samples). C, caudal; LS, lesion site; R, rostral; 
TNC, tenascin-C.
1772 www.moleculartherapy.org  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
notion that lack of TNC renders the hostile environment in the 
injured spinal cord even more unfavorable for axonal survival 
and regrowth.
tnc expression in the injured spinal cord  
of tnc+/+ mice
We further analyzed the expression pattern of TNC in the 
injured spinal cord of wild-type mice by immunohistochemis-
try rostral and caudal to the lesion site as a function of time 
after lesion. In noninjured TNC+/+ mice (Figure 6a) and in 
lesioned TNC–/– mice (data not shown), no TNC immuno-
reactivity was detected. In injured TNC+/+ mice, TNC was 
upregulated already 2 days after injury rostral and caudal to the 
lesion site, reached a peak between 4 and 7 days after injury to 
be reduced thereafter, but still being elevated when compared to 
the uninjured spinal cords at 30 days (Figure 6b). To quantify 
TNC expression, digital images taken from serial sections were 
subjected to mean gray value detection as a measure of average 
fluorescence intensity. Significantly stronger TNC immunore-
activity was found rostral (125 ± 6.0 arbitrary units, AU) than 
TNC+/+ 
TNC−/− 
a 
b 
TNC+/+ 
0 
D
is
ta
nc
e 
(µm
) 
1,000 
1,200 
7 days 
14 days 
30 days 
400 
600 
800 
200 
TNC−/− 
* 
c
Figure 5 corticospinal tract axonal ‘dying-back’ is reduced in 
tnc–/– mice after spinal cord injury. Localization of corticospinal tract 
axons anterogradely labeled with fluoro-ruby (red) with respect to the 
center of the lesion (indicated by stars) as seen by immunolabeling of 
astrocytes by GFAP (green) in consecutive longitudinal sections of a (a) 
TNC+/+ and (b) TNC–/– mice 30 days after spinal cord injury. Tips of the 
longest axons of the corticospinal tracts are indicated by arrows. Bar = 
100 µm. (c) Mean distances (±SEM) between the tips of the corticospinal 
tract axons and the lesion center in TNC–/– mice and TNC+/+ mice at 
7, 14, and 30 days after injury (n = 4 for each time point). Broken lines 
indicate extent of the glial scar. Asterisk indicates a significant difference 
between the genotypes (P < 0.01, t-test). GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic pro-
tein; TNC, tenascin-C.
LF
TNC+/+
Intact
183 kd
25 kd
6
G
ra
y 
va
lu
e 
in
te
ns
ity
0 0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
*
*
5 4 3 2 1 L 1 2 3 4 5 6
Rostral Caudal Intact Rostral Caudal
Intact Rostral Caudal
TNC−/−
TNC
TN
C/
G
AP
DH
GAPDH
LF LF
LF
DF
a
c
d e
b
DF
Figure 6 Immunohistochemical and western blot analysis of tnc 
expression in intact and injured spinal cords 4 days after injury. 
(a) By immunohistochemistry, TNC is hardly detectable in the intact 
spinal cord. (b) In the lesioned spinal cords of TNC+/+ mice, 4 days 
after injury, TNC is upregulated in both gray matter and white matter. 
(c) Western blot analysis of TNC expression is consistent with the fluores-
cence intensity evaluation (n = 4 for western blot), with TNC being more 
predominantly expressed in the spinal cord rostral to the lesion site, less 
in the spinal cord caudal to the lesion site, and least in the intact spinal 
cord. Equal loading of protein extracts is seen by western blot analy-
sis of GAPDH. (d) Mean immunofluorescence intensities in consecutive 
transverse spinal cord sections show higher levels of TNC in the spinal 
cord rostral than caudal to the lesion site (n = 4 for immunofluores-
cence, mean values ± SEM are shown). The lesion center is designated 
as level “L,” and other sequential levels are designated as levels 1, 2, 
etc. at 600-µm spaced intervals rostrally and caudally from the lesion. 
(e) Quantitative evaluation of band intensities by western blot analy-
sis of intact spinal cords and segments of injured spinal cords proximal 
and distal to the lesion site. Asterisk indicates a significant difference 
between groups (P < 0.01, t-test). Bar = 100 µm. DF, dorsal funiculus; 
GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; LF, lateral funicu-
lus; TNC, tenascin-C.
Molecular Therapy  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 1773
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
caudal to the lesion site (86 ± 7.7 AU; Figure 6d). It is note-
worthy that prominent TNC expression was visible in both gray 
and white matter of the spinal cord including the dorsal and the 
lateral funiculi occupied by the main descending axonal tracts, 
including the CST. Results of western blot analysis were consis-
tent with the fluorescence intensity evaluation in that TNC is 
more expressed in the spinal cord rostral to the lesion site (1.96 ± 
0.06 AU), less in the spinal cord caudal to the lesion site (1.34 
± 0.08 AU), and least in the intact spinal cord (0.95 ± 0.05 AU; 
Figure 6c). These observations, in conjunction observations of 
on injury-induced axonal retraction, suggest that TNC exerts 
a positive influence on the integrity of severed axonal stumps 
rostral to the lesion site.
rescue of injury-induced axonal retraction in tnc–/– 
mice by exogenous tnc
To test the assumption that TNC is essential for maintenance of 
axonal integrity, we administered the TNC-derived fusion protein 
GST-fnD to the injured spinal cord of TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice. 
This fnD TNC promotes neurite outgrowth in vitro and is derived 
from TNC splice variants closely related to periods of increased 
axonal growth in the developing CNS.14–16,20–22,36 In control 
TNC–/– mice, which received only GST, the distance between the 
lesion center and the tips of the CST axons was 1,160 ± 280 µm on 
average (see Figure 7 for individual  values), which is similar to the 
distance of retraction in lesioned and untreated TNC–/– mice (see 
earlier text). In TNC–/– mice treated with GST-fnD fusion pro-
tein, axonal retraction was significantly reduced to 446 ± 93 µm (P 
< 0.05, t-test, compared with control treatment). This result shows 
that the amount of GST-fnD that had been applied to the injured 
spinal cord of TNC–/– mice is sufficient to reduce the overt retrac-
tion to levels seen in TNC+/+ mice. Exogenous TNC application 
to TNC+/+ mice did not influence the extent of axonal retrac-
tion (axonal retraction of 304 ± 79 and 261 ± 48 µm in TNC+/+ 
mice, which received GST-fnD fusion protein or glutathione 
S-transferase (GST) alone, respectively; no significant difference 
by t-test; see Figure 7 for individual values). The experiment using 
fnD and GST proteins was designed to test effects on the integrity 
of corticospinal axons. To deliver maximum amounts of protein 
locally, a catheter was inserted in the subdural space at the level of 
cauda equina, passed along the sacral and lumbar spinal segments 
and its tip was fixed in close vicinity of the lesion scar. This posi-
tioning of the catheter caused, as indicated by histological exami-
nations, some damage to the distal spinal cord that precluded use 
of outcome measures used for TNC–/– and TNC+/+ mice like 
analyses of locomotion, H-reflex, and monaminergic axons.
AAV-fnd improves functional recovery in wild-type 
mice after spinal cord injury
Considering the negative effects of TNC deficiency on spinal cord 
regeneration and the rescue of injury-induced axonal retraction in 
TNC–/– mice by exogenous TNC, we tested the effect of a long-
lasting viral-mediated delivery of TNC on functional recovery. 
We designed AAV vectors, which carry either the fnD-c-myc gene 
or the GFP gene for in vivo application.6 We injected AAV-fnD 
(n = 11) or AAV-GFP (n = 9) into the spinal cords of TNC+/+ 
mice immediately after injury and detected the expression of the 
target genes by staining the c-myc tagged on the fnD 1 week after 
the injection (Supplementary Figure S1). The expression lasted 
for at least 8 weeks after the injection, the longest observation 
time (data not shown). Analyses of locomotor recovery revealed a 
strong positive effect of AAV-fnD compared to AAV-GFP, which 
was apparent as early as 2 weeks after injury and lasted for the 
whole observation period of 8 weeks (Figure 8). The results of 
this experiment clearly indicate that TNC-fnD improves spinal 
cord regeneration and that its delivery by viral vectors to the 
injured spinal cord can be considered as a potential therapeutic 
approach.
500
0
TNC
+/+  fnD
TNC
+/+  GS
T
TNC
−/−  fnD
TNC
−/−  GS
T
D
is
ta
nc
e 
(µm
)
1,000
1,500
Figure 7 tnc-derived fusion protein Gst-fnd rescues the dying 
back of corticospinal tract axons in tnc–/– mice but does not pro-
mote further regrowth of corticospinal tract axons in tnc+/+ mice. 
The distance between the tips of the corticospinal tract axons and lesion 
center was used as index of axonal degeneration after spinal cord injury 
in individual animals (indicated by circles). Four groups were tested: 
TNC-derived fusion protein GST-fnD was administered to the spinal 
cords of TNC+/+ (TNC+/+ fnD, n = 3) and TNC–/– (TNC–/– fnD, n = 4) 
mice; similarly, GST was administered as control to TNC+/+ (TNC+/+ 
GST, n = 3) and TNC–/– (TNC–/– GST, n = 3) mice. fnD, fibronec-
tin type III homologous domain D; GST, glutathione S-transferase; 
TNC, tenascin-C.
In
ta
ct
0
2
BM
S
4
6
8
10
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
180
160
a b
1 
w
ee
k
2 
w
ee
ks
3 
we
ek
s
*
*
* *
AAV-fnD
AAV-GFP
AAV-fnD
AAV-GFP
4 
w
ee
ks
6 
we
ek
s
8 
we
ek
s
In
ta
ct
1 
w
ee
k
 
2 
w
ee
ks
3 
we
ek
s
4 
w
ee
ks
6 
we
ek
s
8 
we
ek
s
Fo
ot
-s
te
pp
in
g 
an
gl
e * * *
*
*
Figure 8 AAV-fnd improves locomotor recovery after spinal cord 
injury. Recovery was evaluated by (a) BMS and (b) foot-stepping angle 
at 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 weeks after spinal cord injury and AAV injection. 
Locomotor recovery in the AAV-fnD group (n = 11) is better than in 
AAV-GFP group (n = 9). Shown are mean values ± SEM. Asterisk indicates 
statistical significance (t-test) (*P < 0.05). AAV, adeno-associated virus; 
BMS, Basso Mouse Scale; fnD, fibronectin type III homologous domain 
D; GFP, green fluorescent protein.
1774 www.moleculartherapy.org  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
AAV-fnd increases regrowth/sprouting of 
monaminergic axons and reduces lesion scar volume 
in wild-type mice
Because significant correlations had been found between func-
tional recovery, evaluated by either foot-stepping angle or BMS 
score, and monaminergic reinnervation of the distal spinal 
cord after injury,33 on one hand, and TNC deficiency reduced 
monaminergic regrowth/sprouting (Figure 4), on the other, we 
examined whether enhanced functional recovery in AAV-fnD-
treated wild-type mice could be related to improved monaminer-
gic reinnervation. Quantification of TH+ axons in the distal spinal 
cords revealed that the numbers of monaminergic fibers at 8 weeks 
were significantly higher in AAV-fnD-treated mice (69 ± 11; n = 
8) than in AAV-GFP-treated controls (28 ± 1.6; n = 7, P < 0.01). 
This observation indicates a more vigorous regenerative response 
of monaminergic fibers in the AAV-fnD-treated spinal cords. In 
contrast to TH+ axons, anterograde labeling revealed that AAV-
fnD in C57BL/6J mice, similar to GST-fnD in TNC+/+ mice, did 
not attenuate the retraction of corticospinal axons (axonal retrac-
tion of 433 ± 23 and 480 ± 43 µm in AAV-fnD- and AAV-GFP-
treated mice, n = 6 for each group, P > 0.05, t-test). This finding 
is not in contradiction to the observed functional effects since the 
locomotor abilities estimated by the BMS score and the foot step-
ping angle are not dependent on CST functions.6
Previous study also demonstrated a high degree of covariation 
between functional estimates and scar volume after spinal cord 
injury in mice.6 We hence examined the lesion scar volume and 
observed that the volume was smaller in the AAV-fnD-treated 
mice (0.67 ± 0.08 mm3; n = 8) compared with controls (1.03 ± 
0.09 mm3; n = 7, P < 0.05). This observation, taken together with 
the improved regrowth/sprouting of TH+ axons in the AAV-fnD-
treated spinal cords, indicates that AAV-fnD exerts its beneficial 
effects through decrease in scaring and improved axonal regen-
eration after spinal cord injury.
dIscussIon
Here, we provide evidence that TNC is beneficial for CNS regen-
eration. TNC–/– mice show reduced locomotor recovery after 
spinal cord injury when compared with TNC+/+ littermates. This 
inferior outcome is associated with attenuated H-reflex excit-
ability and reduced survival and/or sprouting of axons. Positive 
functional effects were achieved by infusion of TNC-fnD into the 
spinal cord and overexpression of this TNC domain in the injured 
spinal cord of wild-type mice via a viral construct.
Mechanisms of tnc influence on spinal cord 
regeneration
Upregulation of TNC has previously been observed after lesions 
of the CNS,10,13,37 but its role in tissue repair has not been under-
stood. Our results indicate that TNC has beneficial functions 
after  spinal cord lesion by preservation of axonal integrity and/
or sprouting. In TNC–/– mice, myelinated corticospinal axons 
undergo a more pronounced secondary degeneration and non-
myelinated monaminergic axons distal to the site of injury 
are less numerous compared with TNC+/+ mice. Moreover, 
 administration of a beneficial domain of TNC, TNC-fnD, rescues 
this degeneration. These findings are in agreement with previous 
observations that TNC, when presented to growing neurites as 
a uniform substrate, enhances neurite outgrowth and supports 
neuronal survival.14–17,36 In addition to influences exerted by TNC 
in close vicinity of axons, TNC may influence axonal survival by 
more indirect mechanisms.
In addition to neuroprotection, we have to consider that 
TNC is involved in synaptic plasticity.21 The observed reduc-
tion of  spinal afferent inputs to lamina VII in the spinal cords 
of injured TNC–/– mice may reflect a region-specific effect on 
injury- induced synaptic remodeling. In line with this notion is 
the finding that TNC overexpression is associated with seizure-
induced synaptic formation in the hippocampus.38 The positive 
effects of TNC on regeneration may not be restricted to the CNS: 
TNC expression is upregulated in various tissues after injury, for 
example, peripheral nerve, skin, and skeletal muscle39,40 and the 
absence of TNC has negative impacts on the outcome of facial 
nerve injury.41 Therefore, substantial evidence indicates that TNC 
promotes healing in various tissues.
therapeutic potential of tnc
The scanty knowledge of the mechanisms regulating TNC 
 expression in the injured spinal cord currently precludes the 
possibility to devise strategies for enhancement of its expression 
via regulatory pathways. Therefore, we used an AAV construct, 
previously shown to be an efficient vehicle for exogenous protein 
expression in the injured spinal cord,42 to achieve overexpression 
of the neurite outgrowth-promoting fnD of TNC in wild-type, 
i.e., TNC-competent, mice. Because AAV constructs are con-
sidered compatible with clinical applications,43 the functional 
and morphological improvement observed in TNC-fnD-treated 
mice compared with control animals is promising. Moreover, it 
is  conceivable that combinatorial AAV-based treatments using, 
in addition to TNC, other molecules beneficial for regenera-
tion, such as L1,42 or combination with treatment of regeneration 
conducive chondroitinase ABC, proteases, cytokines, and other 
agents could generate a higher potential for treatment of spinal 
cord injury and other CNS traumas and diseases. Simultaneous 
overexpression of TNC and TNC receptors may be another 
efficient approach. This notion is supported by recent observa-
tions that AAV-mediated overexpression of α9 integrin, a recep-
tor for the nonalternatively spliced region of TNC, in DRG and 
spinal cord neurons in adult rats, increases regeneration of sen-
sory axons and enables recovery of thermosensation.44 Efficient 
delivery of TNC may not be restricted to viral constructs, as a 
neurite outgrowth-promoting peptide derived from the fnD of 
TNC also promotes axonal regeneration in the hemisected spi-
nal cord of wild-type rats when  covalently attached to polyamide 
nanofibers.45
MAterIAls And MetHods
Animals. C57BL/6J mice (female, 8 weeks old) were purchased from 
Taconic (Hudson, NY). TNC-deficient mice were derived from the origi-
nal stock.24 Heterozygous (TNC+/–) mice were intercrossed to yield homo-
zygous TNC-deficient (TNC–/–) and wild-type (TNC+/+) littermates 
on a C57BL/6J genetic background after six generations of backcrossing 
with C57BL/6J mice. Genotypes were determined by PCR analysis using 
primers derived from the intron between exons 1 and 2 (5′-AGC CCC 
Molecular Therapy  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 1775
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
TGC CTA CCT TTT CCT AAT G-3′), from the single LoxP–BamHI site 
(5′-CCA GCT TTA TCG GAT CCA TAA CTT CG-3′), and from exon 2 
(5′-CTT CGG GAG TGA GGG CAA ACA AAG-3′).
Antibodies. The polyclonal antibodies pK7 and KAF 9-2 to TNC have been 
described.8 Rabbit polyclonal antibody to glial fibrillary acidic protein and 
mouse monoclonal antibody to fibronectin were purchased from Sigma 
Chemical (St Louis, MO). Rabbit polyclonal antibody to TH and mouse 
monoclonal antibody to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(MAB374) were purchased from Chemicon (Hofheim, Germany). Mouse 
monoclonal antibody against VGLUT1 was purchased from Synaptic 
Systems (Göttingen, Germany). For indirect immunofluorescence and 
western blot analysis, secondary antibodies against rabbit or mouse IgGs 
and conjugated with Cy2, Cy3, or horseradish peroxidase were purchased 
from Dianova (Hamburg, Germany).
Spinal cord injury. All surgical procedures and postoperative care were 
approved by the local authorities and were in agreement with the guidelines 
of the European Community and the National Institutes of Health. The 
animals were deeply anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection (0.01 ml/g 
body weight) with a mixture of Ketanest (ketamine) (20%; Parke-Davis, 
Berlin, Germany) and Rompun (xylazine) (8%; Bayer, Leverkusen, 
Germany). Laminectomy was performed at the T7–T9 level with mouse 
laminectomy forceps (Fine Science Tools, Heidelberg, Germany). The spi-
nal cord was compressed by a mouse spinal cord compression device.42 
This device controls a pair of watchmaker forceps, which are mounted on 
a metal block attached to a stereotaxic frame and automated with regard 
to the force and time of compression by an electromagnetic device. The 
spinal cord was compressed for 1 second by a time-controlled current flow 
through the electromagnetic drive. The skin was closed using 6-0 nylon 
sutures (Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany). The operated mice were kept at 
37 °C for 12 hours to prevent hypothermia. Afterward, they were housed 
individually in standard cages and kept in a conditioned room (22 °C) with 
standard water and food provided ad libitum. If animals died prior to the 
time points they were excluded from the cohort.
Evaluation of motor functions. The recovery of ground locomotion 
was evaluated using a mouse rating scale, the BMS.26 In addition, motor 
 recovery was analyzed using a numerical measure for plantar stepping 
evaluation, the foot-stepping angle.6 In brief, a left- and a right-side view 
of each animal during two consecutive walking trials on a wooden beam 
(1-m long, 4-cm wide) was captured before the operation and at various 
time points after the operation with a video camera (A602fc camera; Basler, 
Ahrensburg, Germany) at 100 frames per second and analyzed with the 
affiliated analysis software (SIMI Motion; SIMI Reality Motion Systems, 
Unterschleissheim, Germany).
H-reflex recordings. Preparation of animals and the H-reflex recording tech-
nique were previously described.27 Briefly, under ketamine–xylazine anes-
thesia (see earlier text), a ground needle electrode was applied at the base of 
the animal’s tail. Needle electrodes (stainless steel, diameter: 0.4 mm) were 
used for sciatic nerve stimulation. The stimulating electrodes were inserted 
between the two heads of the biceps femoris muscle in the thigh so that the 
cathode was located rostrally to the anode. For electromyography record-
ings, a reference stainless steel electrode was fixed to the skin between the 
first and second digit and an active recording electrode (tungsten, diameter: 
0.25 mm) was inserted between the second and the third cuneiform bones. 
Electrode positioning was performed under a  stereomicroscope. The sciatic 
nerve was stimulated using bipolar electrical pulses of 0.2-ms duration to 
elicit reflex responses. Stimulus intensity was gradually increased until both 
M- and H-waves with latencies of ~2 and 5 ms, respectively, were visible. 
After the threshold measurement, stimulus intensity was further increased 
until maximal and stable H-responses were elicited. Thereafter, stimulation 
continued at the defined suprathreshold level at frequencies of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 
1, 2, 3, and 5 Hz. Six consecutive responses were recorded at each frequency. 
The amplitudes of M- and H-waves were measured as peak-to-peak  values, 
averaged (excluding the first response at each frequency) and used to 
 calculate H/M ratios. The latencies of the responses were measured as time 
elapsed between trigger and peak of each waveform.
Anterograde labeling of CST. For CST anterograde labeling, TNC+/+ and 
TNC–/– mice were subjected to the spinal cord injury according to the 
time points (7 days, 14 days and 30 days, for number of mice per group, see 
legend to Figure 5). Seven days before being perfused, the animals were 
anesthetized and their heads were fixed in a stereotaxic frame. Three 1-mm 
wide holes were drilled through the cranium overlying the sensorimotor 
cortex (coordinates: –0.5 mm, –1.75 mm, –3.0 mm Bregma, 2 mm lateral, 
2 mm deep).42 A glass micropipette was used to inject 2 µl of a 10% solution 
of fluoro-ruby ( dextran tetramethylrhodamine 10,000 MW, lysine fixable; 
Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) into the motor cortex. Animals survived 
for 7 days. Serial, 30-µm thick parasagittal  sections were obtained from the 
spinal cords. The sections were analyzed by confocal microscopy. To quan-
tify axon retraction,34 the center of the compression lesion was chosen as a 
reference point. The distance between this point and the nearest detectable 
axon tips of the CST were measured.
Injection of TNC-fnD-GST fusion protein. To probe whether exogenous 
TNC can compensate for the loss of TNC in TNC–/– mice, TNC-derived 
fusion protein GST-fnD, which corresponds to the alternatively spliced 
fibronectin type III homologous repeat D of human TNC, and was previ-
ously shown to enhance neurite outgrowth in vitro,22,36 was administered 
into the injured spinal cord locally by means of a catheter (300 µm outer 
diameter, 100 µm inner diameter) connected to an Alzet osmotic pump 
(Model 1002; DURECT, Cupertino, CA). The GST-fnD fusion protein was 
tested for bioactivity and found to be neurite outgrowth promoting in vitro 
in the presence of the GST tag (data not shown). The catheter was inserted 
in the subdural space at the level of cauda equina, passed along the sacral 
and lumbar spinal segments and its tip was fixed 2 mm caudal to the lesion 
site. FnD-GST (200 µg/ml, dissolved in 0.9% saline solution) was infused at 
a rate of 0.25 µl/hour for 14 days. Control animals were infused with GST. 
Anterograde labeling of the CST was introduced 23 days after spinal cord 
injury. Mice were euthanized 7 days after tracer injection, i.e., 30 days after 
spinal cord injury.
AAV vector production. An AAV serotype 5–based viral vector was 
 constructed to express the secreted form of TNC-fnD. The vector genome 
consisted of AAV-2 inverted terminal repeats, the short version (530 bp) 
of the murine immediate-early cytomegalovirus promoter, a C-terminally 
c-myc tagged complementary DNA encoding TNC-fnD (directed for 
secretion by an N-terminal fusion to the signal peptide of secreted  alkaline 
phosphatase), the woodchuck hepatitis virus post-translational control 
element for enhanced transgene expression, and a bovine growth hormone 
polyadenylation site. This type of viral vector has been demonstrated to 
permit transgene expression in neurons and glial cells of the lesioned 
 spinal cord.42 Vectors were produced by transient transfection of HEK-293 
cells using pDP5 as a helper plasmid. Cells were harvested at 2.5 days after 
transfection, viral particles were purified by iodixanol step- gradient cen-
trifugation and fast protein liquid chromatography (Äkta FPLC; Amersham 
Biosciences, Freiburg, Germany) on 1 ml Q-FF anion-exchange column 
(GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany), dialysis against excess amounts of 
phosphate-buffered saline, and concentration on centrifugal spin concen-
trators (150 kd cutoff; Orbital Biosciences, Dulles, VA). Vector genomes 
were determined by quantitative PCR, and purity was confirmed to be at 
least 99.5% by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
and silver staining (data not shown).
AAV-TNC-fnD and AAV-GFP injection. The virus was injected into the 
lesion site immediately after compression spinal cord injury as described.42 
In brief, the viral constructs AAV-TNC-fnD and AAV-GFP (3 × 107 
 transducing units in 1 μl) were injected with a nanoliter  microinjector 
1776 www.moleculartherapy.org  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
(World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) over a time period of 
5  minutes. The needle was kept in the tissue for another 2 minutes before 
it was slowly withdrawn.
Histological processing. Mice were anesthetized and perfused with 4% 
formaldehyde in 0.1 mol/l phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The spinal cords were 
dissected and postfixed in the same fixative overnight at 4 °C. Spinal cords 
were embedded in Tissue-Tek (Sakura Finetek Europe, Zoeterwoude, The 
Netherlands) and frozen in isopentane precooled with liquid nitrogen. 
Spinal cords were then cut transversely or parasagittally on a cryostat to 
obtain serial 25-µm thick sections. Sections were collected on Superfrost 
Plus slides (Menzel, Braunschweig, Germany) from 25 equidistant 
(600-µm spaced) segments of the spinal cord, i.e., up to 1.5 cm rostrally 
and caudally from the lesion epicenter. The lesion center was designated 
as level “L”.
Immunohistochemistry. Sections were subjected to antigen retrieval in 
10 mmol/l sodium citrate solution (80 °C, 30 minutes), followed by non-
specific blocking with normal goat serum (room temperature, 1 hour) 
before the application of the primary antibodies. For counting TH+ axons 
and VGLUT1+ synaptic terminals, antibodies were used at optimal dilu-
tions (1:800 and 1:500, respectively). For detection of TNC, fibronectin and 
glial fibrillary acidic protein, antibodies against TNC (1:500), fibronectin 
(1:500), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (1:500) were applied to the sec-
tions overnight at 4 °C followed by Cy2- or Cy3-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG 
antibodies. All sections were counterstained with bis-benzimide (Hoechst 
dye 32258) (Sigma Chemical) and, after washing, mounted with Aqua-
Poly/mount (Polysciences, Warrington, PA). Sections were viewed on a 
fluorescence microscope (Axiophot 2, Zeiss, Thornwood, NY) and/or a 
confocal laser microscope (LSM 510, Zeiss). Gray value measurements 
were performed with ImageJ software (National Institute of Health, USA, 
free software available at http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) from digital images.
Parasagittal spinal cord sections stained for TH were used to analyze 
monaminergic axons in the lumbar spinal cord. TH+ axons projecting 
beyond an arbitrarily selected border 250 µm caudally to the lesion site 
were counted in every 5th parasagittal serial section from the spinal cord 
of each animal on an Axiophot 2 microscope (Zeiss) equipped with a 
motorized stage and Neurolucida software-controlled computer system 
(MicroBrightField Europe, Magdeburg, Germany).
To investigate densities of VGLUT1+ synaptic terminals, transverse 
spinal cord sections caudal to the lesion scar were used for analysis. Digital 
images were obtained on an LSM 510 confocal microscope using a ×63 
oil immersion objective and a digital resolution of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels. 
The gray value was adjusted using threshold to convert the images to 
gray scale for optimal color intensity with ImageJ software. Criteria 
for identification of synaptic terminals were: objects with size >2 µm2 
and circularity 0–1. Number and perimeter of synaptic terminals were 
sampled in the Clarke’s column, lamina VII, and lamina IX (Figure 3) of 
each section. Density was calculated as number of VGLUT1+ synaptic 
terminals per unit area. The values for left and right areas were averaged 
for each section. Six sections 250 µm apart were analyzed per animal, and 
the mean values from individual animals were used to calculate group 
mean values.
To estimate the lesion scar volume, spaced serial sections 250 µm 
apart were stained with fibronectin and used for estimations of the scar 
volume using the Cavalieri principle as described previously.6 Areas of the 
scar required for volume estimation were measured by ImageJ software.
Western blot analysis. For western blot analysis, four TNC+/+ and four 
TNC–/– mice were euthanized 4 days after spinal cord injury. The spi-
nal cords were dissected out on ice and divided into two segments with 
regard to the lesion center, one rostral to the lesion center and the other 
caudal to it, with 5-mm length for each segment. The samples were then 
homogenized separately, centrifuged at 1,000 g and 4 °C for 15 minutes to 
remove insoluble material, and the supernatants were collected. Protein 
 concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce 
Chemical, Rockford, IL). Samples were subjected to 8% sodium dodecyl 
sulfate– polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto a nitro-
cellulose membrane  following standard protocols.42 Signal was detected by 
an enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences 
Europe, Freiburg, Germany). Equal amounts of protein were loaded into 
each lane and band intensities were normalized to those of glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
Statistical analyses. Data were collected in a blinded manner. Group mean 
values were compared using two-sided Student’s t-test for independent 
samples or one-way analysis of variance for repeated measurements and 
post hoc Tukey’s test. The accepted level of significance was 5%. Values are 
shown as mean values with standard errors of the mean (SEM).
suPPleMentArY MAterIAl
Figure S1. Expression of transgene products 1 week after spinal cord 
compression and injection of AAV-fnD or AAV-GFP.
AcKnoWledGMents
We are grateful to Fabio Morellini for breeding of TNC+/+ and TNC–/– 
mice, Mirjam Sibbe for discussions, Emanuela Szpotowicz for technical 
assistance, Achim Dahlman for genotyping, Charles ffrench- Constant 
for comments on the manuscript, and the German Research Society 
(GRK 255, SPP 1109 and SPP 1135), Canadian Spinal Research 
Organization, The Daniel Heumann Fund for Spinal Cord Research and 
the National Institutes of Health (R01 NS40394) for support. M.S. is 
New Jersey Professor of Spinal Cord Research.
reFerences
1. GrandPré, T, Nakamura, F, Vartanian, T and Strittmatter, SM (2000). Identification of 
the Nogo inhibitor of axon regeneration as a Reticulon protein. Nature 403: 439–444.
2. McKerracher, L, David, S, Jackson, DL, Kottis, V, Dunn, RJ and Braun, PE (1994). 
Identification of myelin-associated glycoprotein as a major myelin-derived inhibitor of 
neurite growth. Neuron 13: 805–811.
3. Wang, KC, Koprivica, V, Kim, JA, Sivasankaran, R, Guo, Y, Neve, RL et al. (2002). 
Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein is a Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite 
outgrowth. Nature 417: 941–944.
4. Niclou, SP, Franssen, EH, Ehlert, EM, Taniguchi, M and Verhaagen, J (2003). 
Meningeal cell-derived semaphorin 3A inhibits neurite outgrowth. Mol Cell Neurosci 
24: 902–912.
5. Jones, LL, Margolis, RU and Tuszynski, MH (2003). The chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans neurocan, brevican, phosphacan, and versican are differentially 
regulated following spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 182: 399–411.
6. Apostolova, I, Irintchev, A and Schachner, M (2006). Tenascin-R restricts posttraumatic 
remodeling of motoneuron innervation and functional recovery after spinal cord 
injury in adult mice. J Neurosci 26: 7849–7859.
7. Bradbury, EJ, Moon, LD, Popat, RJ, King, VR, Bennett, GS, Patel, PN et al. (2002). 
Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 
416: 636–640.
8. Bartsch, U, Faissner, A, Trotter, J, Dörries, U, Bartsch, S, Mohajeri, H et al. (1994). 
Tenascin demarcates the boundary between the myelinated and nonmyelinated 
part of retinal ganglion cell axons in the developing and adult mouse. J Neurosci 14: 
4756–4768.
9. Steindler, DA, Settles, D, Erickson, HP, Laywell, ED, Yoshiki, A, Faissner, A et al. (1995). 
Tenascin knockout mice: barrels, boundary molecules, and glial scars. J Neurosci 15: 
1971–1983.
10. Zhang, Y, Winterbottom, JK, Schachner, M, Lieberman, AR and Anderson, PN (1997). 
Tenascin-C expression and axonal sprouting following injury to the spinal dorsal 
columns in the adult rat. J Neurosci Res 49: 433–450.
11. Jones, FS and Jones, PL (2000). The tenascin family of ECM glycoproteins: structure, 
function, and regulation during embryonic development and tissue remodeling. 
Dev Dyn 218: 235–259.
12. Nakic, M, Manahan-Vaughan, D, Reymann, KG and Schachner, M (1998). Long-term 
potentiation in vivo increases rat hippocampal tenascin-C expression. J Neurobiol 37: 
393–404.
13. Nakic, M, Mitrovic, N, Sperk, G and Schachner, M (1996). Kainic acid activates 
transient expression of tenascin-C in the adult rat hippocampus. J Neurosci Res 44: 
355–362.
14. Husmann, K, Faissner, A and Schachner, M (1992). Tenascin promotes cerebellar 
granule cell migration and neurite outgrowth by different domains in the fibronectin 
type III repeats. J Cell Biol 116: 1475–1486.
15. Lochter, A and Schachner, M (1993). Tenascin and extracellular matrix glycoproteins: 
from promotion to polarization of neurite growth in vitro. J Neurosci 13: 3986–4000.
16. Dörries, U, Taylor, J, Xiao, Z, Lochter, A, Montag, D and Schachner, M (1996). Distinct 
effects of recombinant tenascin-C domains on neuronal cell adhesion, growth cone 
guidance, and neuronal polarity. J Neurosci Res 43: 420–438.
Molecular Therapy  vol. 18 no. 10 oct. 2010 1777
© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy
TNC in SCI Regeneration
17. Taylor, J, Pesheva, P and Schachner, M (1993). Influence of janusin and tenascin on 
growth cone behavior in vitro. J Neurosci Res 35: 347–362.
18. Meiners, S and Geller, HM (1997). Long and short splice variants of human tenascin 
differentially regulate neurite outgrowth. Mol Cell Neurosci 10: 100–116.
19. Meiners, S, Mercado, ML, Nur-e-Kamal, MS and Geller, HM (1999). Tenascin-C 
contains domains that independently regulate neurite outgrowth and neurite 
guidance. J Neurosci 19: 8443–8453.
20. Rigato, F, Garwood, J, Calco, V, Heck, N, Faivre-Sarrailh, C and Faissner, A (2002). 
Tenascin-C promotes neurite outgrowth of embryonic hippocampal neurons through 
the alternatively spliced fibronectin type III BD domains via activation of the cell 
adhesion molecule F3/contactin. J Neurosci 22: 6596–6609.
21. Dityatev, A and Schachner, M (2003). Extracellular matrix molecules and synaptic 
plasticity. Nat Rev Neurosci 4: 456–468.
22. Mercado, ML, Nur-e-Kamal, A, Liu, HY, Gross, SR, Movahed, R and Meiners, S 
(2004). Neurite outgrowth by the alternatively spliced region of human tenascin-C is 
mediated by neuronal α7β1 integrin. J Neurosci 24: 238–247.
23. Liu, HY, Nur-E-Kamal, A, Schachner, M and Meiners, S (2005). Neurite guidance by 
the FnC repeat of human tenascin-C: neurite attraction vs. neurite retention. Eur J 
Neurosci 22: 1863–1872.
24. Evers, MR, Salmen, B, Bukalo, O, Rollenhagen, A, Bösl, MR, Morellini, F et al. (2002). 
Impairment of L-type Ca2+ channel-dependent forms of hippocampal synaptic 
plasticity in mice deficient in the extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin-C. 
J Neurosci 22: 7177–7194.
25. Basso, DM, Fisher, LC, Anderson, AJ, Jakeman, LB, McTigue, DM and Popovich, PG 
(2006). Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in recovery after spinal 
cord injury in five common mouse strains. J Neurotrauma 23: 635–659.
26. Morellini, F and Schachner, M (2006). Enhanced novelty-induced activity, reduced 
anxiety, delayed resynchronization to daylight reversal and weaker muscle strength 
in tenascin-C-deficient mice. Eur J Neurosci 23: 1255–1268.
27. Lee, HJ, Jakovcevski, I, Radonjic, N, Hoelters, L, Schachner, M and Irintchev, A (2009). 
Better functional outcome of spinal cord injury in mice is associated with enhanced 
H-reflex excitability. Exp Neurol 513: 496–510.
28. Lavrov, I, Dy, CJ, Fong, AJ, Gerasimenko, Y, Courtine, G, Zhong, H et al. (2008). 
Epidural stimulation induced modulation of spinal locomotor networks in adult spinal 
rats. J Neurosci 28: 6022–6029.
29. Brumovsky, P, Watanabe, M and Hökfelt, T (2007). Expression of the vesicular 
glutamate transporters-1 and -2 in adult mouse dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord 
and their regulation by nerve injury. Neuroscience 147: 469–490.
30. Erschbamer, M, Pernold, K and Olson, L (2007). Inhibiting epidermal growth 
factor receptor improves structural, locomotor, sensory, and bladder recovery from 
experimental spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 27: 6428–6435.
31. Edgerton, VR, Tillakaratne, NJ, Bigbee, AJ, de Leon, RD and Roy, RR (2004). 
Plasticity of the spinal neural circuitry after injury. Annu Rev Neurosci 27: 145–167.
32. Fouad, K and Pearson, K (2004). Restoring walking after spinal cord injury. 
Prog Neurobiol 73: 107–126.
33. Jakovcevski, I, Wu, J, Karl, N, Leshchyns’ka, I, Sytnyk, V, Chen, J et al. (2007). Glial scar 
expression of CHL1, the close homolog of the adhesion molecule L1, limits recovery 
after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 27: 7222–7233.
34. Houle, JD and Jin, Y (2001). Chronically injured supraspinal neurons exhibit only 
modest axonal dieback in response to a cervical hemisection lesion. Exp Neurol 169: 
208–217.
35. Bareyre, FM, Kerschensteiner, M, Misgeld, T and Sanes, JR (2005). Transgenic labeling 
of the corticospinal tract for monitoring axonal responses to spinal cord injury. 
Nat Med 11: 1355–1360.
36. Meiners, S, Nur-e-Kamal, MS and Mercado, ML (2001). Identification of a neurite 
outgrowth-promoting motif within the alternatively spliced region of human 
tenascin-C. J Neurosci 21: 7215–7225.
37. Laywell, ED, Dörries, U, Bartsch, U, Faissner, A, Schachner, M and Steindler, DA 
(1992). Enhanced expression of the developmentally regulated extracellular matrix 
molecule tenascin following adult brain injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89: 2634–2638.
38. Represa, A and Ben-Ari, Y (1997). Molecular and cellular cascades in seizure-induced 
neosynapse formation. Adv Neurol 72: 25–34.
39. Daniloff, JK, Crossin, KL, Pinçon-Raymond, M, Murawsky, M, Rieger, F and Edelman, 
GM (1989). Expression of cytotactin in the normal and regenerating neuromuscular 
system. J Cell Biol 108: 625–635.
40. Irintchev, A, Salvini, TF, Faissner, A and Wernig, A (1993). Differential expression of 
tenascin after denervation, damage or paralysis of mouse soleus muscle. J Neurocytol 
22: 955–965.
41. Guntinas-Lichius, O, Angelov, DN, Morellini, F, Lenzen, M, Skouras, E, Schachner, M 
et al. (2005). Opposite impacts of tenascin-C and tenascin-R deficiency in mice on the 
functional outcome of facial nerve repair. Eur J Neurosci 22: 2171–2179.
42. Chen, J, Wu, J, Apostolova, I, Skup, M, Irintchev, A, Kügler, S et al. (2007). Adeno-
associated virus-mediated L1 expression promotes functional recovery after spinal 
cord injury. Brain 130: 954–969.
43. Perabo, L, Huber, A, Märsch, S, Hallek, M and Büning, H (2008). Artificial evolution 
with adeno-associated viral libraries. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen 11: 118–126.
44. Andrews, MR, Czvitkovich, S, Dassie, E, Vogelaar, CF, Faissner, A, Blits, B et al. (2009). 
α9 Integrin promotes neurite outgrowth on tenascin-C and enhances sensory axon 
regeneration. J Neurosci 29: 5546–5557.
45. Meiners, S, Ahmed, I, Ponery, AS, Amor, N, Harris, SL, Ayres, V et al. (2007). 
Engineering electrospun nanofibers for spinal cord repair: a discussion. Polym Int 56: 
1340–1348.
