a RESEARCH ARTICLE
Cellular Response After Crush Injury in Adult
Zebrafish Spinal Cord
Subhra Prakash Hui,1 Anindita Dutta,2 and Sukla Ghosh1*
Zebrafish proves to be an excellent model system to study spinal cord regeneration because it can repair
its disengaged axons and replace lost cells after injury, allowing the animal to make functional recovery.
We have characterized injury response following crush injury, which is comparable to the mammalian
mode of injury. Infiltrations of blood cells during early phases involve macrophages that are important in
debris clearance and probably in suppression of inflammatory response. Unlike mammals where second-
ary injury mechanisms lead to apoptotic death of both neurons and glia, here we observe a beneficial role
of apoptotic cell death. Injury-induced proliferation, presence of radial glia cells, and their role as progen-
itor all contribute to cellular replacement and successful neurogenesis after injury in adult zebrafish. To-
gether with cell replacement phenomenon, there is creation of a permissive environment that includes
the absence or clearance of myelin debris, presence of Schwann cells, and absence of inflammatory
response. Developmental Dynamics 239:2962–2979, 2010. VC 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: regeneration; cell death; cell proliferation; spinal cord injury (SCI); neurogenesis; radial glia; zebrafish;
Schwann cell; macrophage
Accepted 24 August 2010
INTRODUCTION
Fish and urodele amphibians main-
tain an extraordinary ability to regen-
erate a variety of complex body parts
including their central nervous sys-
tem (CNS). In contrast, CNS of mam-
mals including human, have a very
limited ability for cellular repair. Any
spinal cord injury (SCI) in mammals
leads to functional decline because of
a progressive pathophysiology affect-
ing cell survival and neurological in-
tegrity. The primary mechanical dam-
age is compounded by a complex
sequence of cellular events like pro-
nounced inflammatory response by
rapid invasion of macrophages/micro-
glia and astrocytes, local loss of neu-
rons and glia, demyelination, axonal
degeneration, and formation of fibro-
glial scar (Balentine, 1978a,b; Blight,
1985; Guth et al., 1999; Popovich
et al., 1997; Donnelly and Popovich
2008), which are responsible for devel-
opment of neuropathology and subse-
quent loss of functions. The precise
mechanisms underlying the expan-
sion of primary injuries are not fully
known, although several factors are
known to be responsible in secondary
degenerative response.
Evidence has also accumulated that
demonstrates the existence of a quies-
cent population of multipotent neural
progenitors in the adult mammalian
central nervous system contrary to
what was previously thought (Mors-
head et al., 1994; Gage, 2000; Alvarez-
Buylla et al., 2002; Song et al., 2002).
These cells, upon proper stimulation
and with a permissive environment,
can even proliferate and differentiate
to neurons, which point towards a
potential for novel therapeutic strat-
egies to induce regeneration after SCI
by generating new neurons. Thus, key
requirements for successful regenera-
tion to take place are (1) cellular
replacement, i.e., the presence of neu-
rons and glia that could be generated
in adequate numbers, (2) significant
cell survival after injury and the abil-
ity of those neurons to extend axons to
the original target, and (3) the axonal
remyelination and axonal regrowth. It
is a necessary prerequisite to study
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
1Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
2Chittaranjan National Cancer Research Institute, Kolkata, India
Grant sponsor: DBT, Govt. of India; Grant number: BT/PR5489/AAQ/03/245/2004.
*Correspondence to: Sukla Ghosh, Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, University of
Calcutta, 92, A. P. C Road, Kolkata 700009, India. E-mail: suklagh2010@gmail.com
DOI 10.1002/dvdy.22438
Published online 8 October 2010 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS 239:2962–2979, 2010
VC 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
these processes in those species of ver-
tebrates that can regrow their axons
and have the capacity to generate new
neurons even in adult life.
Adult zebrafish can regrow axons
spontaneously after spinal cord trans-
ection and are capable of reconnecting
their appropriate targets (Becker et al.,
1997; Bernhardt, 1999). An unusual
feature of fish CNS is that they are
neurogenic and they may continue to
generate new neurons throughout nor-
mal life even in mature uninjured spi-
nal cord (Leonard et al., 1978; Ander-
son and Waxman, 1983; Waxman and
Anderson, 1985). Most of the previous
studies on adult neurogenesis and neu-
ronal regeneration in brain are based
on different teleost species (Zupanc and
Horschke, 1995; Zupanc et al., 2005;
Zupanc and Zupanc, 2006). Although
zebrafish has emerged as a powerful
animal model to study regeneration for
various reasons, very little attention
has been paid to study spinal cord
regeneration in this species. All the
previous studies on spinal cord have
focused on giving complete transection
(Becker et al., 1997, 2005; Reimer
et al., 2009) and none of these studies
have examined the response to crush,
hemisection, or contusion injuries,
which are known to be a significant
focus of research efforts in mammalian
models. Thus, most of the earlier data
cannot be compared directly to the
results from contemporary studies on
mammalian models for SCI.
Evidence from brain injury and SCI
in mammalian adult suggests induction
of apoptosis, which plays a significant
role in secondary degenerative response
(Crowe et al., 1995). Injury-induced apo-
ptosis occurs in different neural popula-
tions like neurons, astrocytes, oligoden-
drocytes, and microglia after SCI
(Shuman et al., 1996; Liu et al., 1997; Li
et al., 1999; Newcomb et al., 1999; Beat-
tie et al., 2000). There are conflicting
reports on the absence or presence of
injury-induced cell death in fish brain in
stages beyond embryogenesis (Fine,
1989; Waxman and Anderson, 1985;
Zupanc et al., 1998). So it is imperative
to address the issue of cell death in the
context of secondary degenerative
response in both regeneration-incompe-
tent and regeneration-competent spe-
cies. It is particularly important to know
what happens in regeneration-compe-
tent species, where the presence or ab-
sence of secondary response has not
been confirmed and characterized. In
the present report, we have character-
ized the lesion after injury at the ultra-
structural level and also demonstrated
a significant level of injury-induced cell
proliferation, neurogenesis, and a low
level of apoptotic cell death in zebrafish
spinal cord after injury, where a compa-
rable mammalian mode of injury, e.g.,
crush, has been used.
RESULTS
Histology of Uninjured Spinal
Cord
Sections from uninjured spinal cord
were stained with either hematoxylin/
eosin (H&E, Fig. 1A) or luxol fast blue/
cresyl violet (Fig. 1J) and trichrome
(not shown) to observe the normal
structure of uninjured spinal cord. We
showed the presence of a very high ra-
tio of white matter compared to grey
matter. Presence of ependyma can be
seen here, which are two to three cell
layers thick (also referred to as ven-
tricular zone) and an ependymal canal
runs through the center of the cord.
Adjacent to ependyma is a subependy-
mal cell layer that contains neurons
(Fig. 1A, J, and J.1).
Time Course Analysis of
Regeneration
We have studied the time course of
regeneration after giving a crush injury
to the adult zebrafish spinal cord. To
characterize the injury, we have docu-
mented the basic cellular events during
regeneration at different time points af-
ter injury by using H&E, luxol fast
blue, and cresyl violet (Fig. 1), tri-
chrome (Fig. 2) staining, as well as ul-
trastructural analysis by TEM (Figs.1
and 2). Immediately after injury, there
is a loss of the blood-brain barrier,
which results in infiltration of blood
cells to the injury site, disruption of ep-
endyma, and a substantial loss of tis-
sue, both in white and grey matter
(Figs. 1B and 2A). Infiltrating blood
cells include macrophages as evidenced
by their phagocytic nature (Fig. 2D–G),
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (Fig.
2H), monocytes with a horse-shoe-
shaped nucleus (Fig. 2I), and red blood
cells (RBC; Figs. 1C, 2B), all of which
can be seen in 3-day post-injury (dpi)
cord. These macrophages are most
likely blood-derived since they are
located in the close vicinity of the blood
vessel (Fig. 2F). A substantially higher
number of macrophage infiltrations
can be demonstrated at the injured site
in 3dpi cord and many macrophages
are present around a dying neuron
(Fig. 2F), which have a characteristic
electron-dense fragmented body in nu-
cleus and retracted cytoplasm (Nagan-
ska and Matyja, 2001). At the same
time point, damaged axons are shown
about to be engulfed by macrophages
(Fig. 2E), whereas 10dpi cord shows
fewer macrophages at the site of injury
(Fig. 2G), although lipophilic inclu-
sions, vacuoles, and some digested resi-
dues of myelin debris that were
engulfed earlier are present inside the
macrophage. Presence of RBC can be
predominantly seen close to the injury
epicenter in 1-, 3-, and 5dpi cord (Fig.
2A–C) and afterwards the infiltration
of RBC decreased considerably (data
not shown). Both 1dpi and 3dpi cord
showed damaged tissue in grey matter,
as disruption of ependyma and com-
pression of the cord is evident (Figs.
1B,C,K, 2A,B). Tissue edema can be
observed as a consequence of injury in
3- to 7dpi cord and is reduced after-
wards. Loss of white matter (Figs.
1B,C,K, 2A,B), can also be confirmed in
injured cord both by luxol fast blue
staining (Fig. 1K) and by ultrastruc-
tural analysis, which revealed demye-
lination of axons (Fig. 1O,P) when com-
pared to normal uninjured cord (Fig.
1N). There are accumulations of some
cells around the cut ends of ependyma
as early as 3dpi, which replace the ini-
tial loss of tissue. Cells around the ep-
endymal canal begin to migrate and
initiate ependymal sealing at the same
time (Fig. 1C, C.1). Accumulation of
cells around the injury site continues to
occur at 5dpi and 7dpi (Fig. 1D and E,
respectively). Progressive ependymal
sealing, which is an early regenerative
event, can be observed at around 5dpi
(Fig. 1D, D.1) when ependymal bulb
formation involving ependyma and the
ependymal canal is obvious. As both
ends of the ependymal bulb join, there
is continuation of the ependymal canal,
which forms a cavity-like structure in
the grey matter of 7dpi (Fig. 1E) and
10dpi cord (Fig. 1F). It is worth men-
tioning that the size of the cavity-like
structure observed at different levels in
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2963
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 1.
2964 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
subsequent sections (data not shown)
of 7dpi cord is quite large (1E). The size
reduces later at day 10 (Fig. 1F) and
further regression can be seen after
15dpi (Fig. 1G and G.1) and at 1 month
of injury (Fig. 1H, L) as regeneration
progresses. These cavity-like struc-
tures are seen only in the grey matter
lined by ependymal cells and may not
be equivalent to what we see in mam-
malian SCI, which is a fluid-filled
astrocyte-lined cavity present in white
matter (Balentine, 1978a,b; Fitch et al.,
1999; Renault-Mihara et al., 2008). We
also observed newly formed neuronal
cell bodies at the injury epicenter,
which are small in size at 10dpi cord
(Fig. 1F.1) and identity of these cells is
further confirmed by using neuronal
markers like Hu along with luxol fast
blue/cresyl violet staining (see Fig. 6H–
K). Both grey matter and white matter
regeneration has occurred by day 15
post-injured cord. A regenerated epen-
dyma, subependyma with newly
formed neurons in the injury epicenter,
and regenerating axons in white mat-
ter (Fig. 1G and G.1) can be observed,
although white matter volume has not
regained the original volume that was
present before injury. We followed the
regeneration time course for a much
longer time period, up to 1 month (Fig.
1H and H.1, I) and 1.5 months post-
injury (data not shown). Complete
regeneration of ependyma is observed
at 1 month post-injured cord with reap-
pearance of lost neurons in the sube-
pendyma near the injury epicenter
(Fig. 1H and H.1, L and L.1) and axons
(Fig. 1L and L.1). Regeneration of
white matter took place without forma-
tion of a cavity, but even at 1 and 1.5
month(s) after injury, full white matter
volume was not regained.
TEM analysis showed presence of
oligodendrocytes and myelinated
axons with compact myelin sheath
and sparsely distributed neurofila-
ment in the axonal body in uninjured
cord (Fig. 1M,N). In 3dpi cord, the
axons are denuded and typical fea-
tures of these demyelinated axons are
the presence of denser neurofilament
within the axonal body (Fig. 1O,P),
whereas myelin sheaths are either
less compact with irregular shapes or
are disintegrating. We observed the
presence of Schwann cells around the
injured demyelinated axons in 10dpi
cord (Fig. 1R), although no Schwann
cells are observed in uninjured cord
and Schwann cells are seen dividing
(Fig. 1Q), which would probably start
remyelination (Fig. 1R). Later on,
some of these cells are wrapping the
axons through basal membrane, sug-
gesting that these cells are indeed
involved in the remyelination process
after injury (Fig. 1S and T). In regen-
erated cord 1 month post-injury, the
presence of remyelinated axons with
thinner myelin sheaths at the injury
epicenter can be seen (Fig. 1S,T) when
compared to uninjured cord (Fig. 1N).
Analysis of Functional
Behavior After SCI
Functional recovery of injured fishes
(n¼6) has been studied by individu-
ally monitoring the swimming behav-
ior of each fish at different time points
and they were compared to control
uninjured fish. Three different time
points of an individual fish have been
represented for the sake of simplicity
(Fig. 3A–E), although another 5 fishes
showed a similar functional recovery
(data not shown). We observed loss of
swimming behavior primarily because
of paralysis of the posterior part of
the body beyond the dorsal fin level
due to SCI. Very little movement has
been recorded at 3dpi (Fig. 3C) com-
pared to uninjured fish. Later on,
movements steadily increased beyond
the 15-day time point and almost
complete functional recovery was
documented after 1 month post-injury
(Fig. 3E).
Time Course Analysis of Cell
Proliferation in the Spinal
Cord After Injury and
Characterization of
Proliferating Cells During
Regeneration
We have shown a substantial amount
of tissue replacement after crush
injury in spinal cord. This led us to
study the proliferation pattern using
BrdU incorporation (S-phase marker),
which detected a spectrum of prolifer-
ating cells during this regenerative
process. We used a 16-hr BrdU incor-
poration time length as it represents
a saturation label for BrdU uptake in
Fig. 1. Longitudinal sections of normal uninjured (A, J) and injured (B–H and K–L) zebrafish spinal cord after H&E (A–H) and luxol fast blue/cresyl vio-
let staining (J–L). A, J: Uninjured spinal cord section shows the presence of white matter (WM), grey matter (GM), neurons (n) in the subependyma
(sep), and ependyma (ep) with ependymal canal (epc). J.1: The higher magnification of J shows an axon (!) in white matter and neurons (n) in the sub-
ependyma (sep). B: 1dpi-section of spinal cord showing loss of both white and grey matter, infiltration of blood cells (red *), and disrupted ependyma
(!!) at the injury epicenter ([bracket]). C, K: 3dpi cord shows blood clot at the site of injury (**) and same section at higher magnification (C.1) showing
initiation of sealing of ependymal canal (ep0) and migrating ependymal cell (white arrow). Another section of 3dpi cord (K) showing severed ependyma,
axonal loss (spiral arrow) and neuronal loss at the injury epicenter (double arrowheads). K.1: Higher magnification of K. D: 5dpi cord reveals accumula-
tion of cells at epicenter and tissue edema. Another 5̀dpi cord at higher magnification (D.1) shows complete sealing of ependyma (ep0) and formation
of ependymal bulb (epb). E: Section of 7dpi cord reveals accumulation of cells at the injury epicenter, swelling of tissue, and also the presence of a
continuous cavity like structure (ca) surrounded by ependymal cells. F: 10dpi cord showing the presence of a smaller cavity (ca) -like structure continu-
ous with regenerating ependymal canal. F.1: Same cord at higher magnification, showing the presence of many newly formed cells (") and a mature
neuron (n) in the injury epicenter. G: Representative section of 15dpi cord reveals a normal regenerated ependyma with complete absence of a cavity-
like structure and partially regenerated white matter. G.1: Higher magnification of the same section shows well-formed ependyma (ep) with an ependy-
mal canal (epc) and regenerated neuron (n) in subependyma (sep). H, L: One-month regenerated cord shows both grey and white matter regeneration
and both neurons (n) and axons (!) are clearly visible at the injury epicenter at higher magnification (H.1, I). Another section (L) showing regeneration
of both white matter and grey matter at the injury epicenter and the same cord at higher magnification (L.1) showing small neuronal cell bodies (n),
reconnected axons (;), and compact ependyma (ep). M, N: Oligodendrocyte (OL) and myelinated axon (ax), with sparsely distributed neurofilaments
(nf) within the axonal body in uninjured cord, respectively. O–P: Representative picture of demyelinating axons (dax) at the injury epicenter of 3dpi cord
showing denuded axon (bold arrow) and axonal body with dense neurofilaments (nf). Q,R: 10dpi cord showing dividing Schwann cells (dsc) and
Schwann cells (SC) associated with demyelinated axons (dax) at the injury epicenter, respectively. S: Remyelinating axon (rax) with Schwann cells (SC)
in regenerating cord 1 month post-injury. T: Higher magnification of indicated area in S showing the basal membrane of Schwann cells (white arrow-
head) around the remyelinating axon (rax). Scale bar ¼ 400 mm (A–H), 20 mm (C.1), 40 mm (D.1–I), 200 mm (J–L), 60 mm (J.1–L.1), 2 mm (M–T).
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2965
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
zebrafish CNS. A previous report
showed that a pulse-label BrdU
uptake between 12–16 hr represents
all cycling cells went through at least
one S phase during incubation (Muel-
ler and Wullimann, 2002). The data of
BrdU incorporation in uninjured and
injured spinal cord tissues at different
time points (3dpi to15dpi) are repre-
sented in Table 1 and Figure 4A–G.
In order to show that cells at S-phase
are indeed going through mitosis, we
have used another proliferation
marker, phosphohistone 3 (H3P) (Fig.
4H,I).
BrdU incorporation was recorded in
adult uninjured cord both in white
matter and grey matter. Many BrdUþ
cells around the ependymal canal can
be seen and the percentage of positive
cells in grey matter is higher than
Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Recovery of functional swimming
behavior after crush injury in spinal cord of
zebrafish. A: Quantification of swimming dis-
tance shows that the 3dpi fish covered much
less distance during swimming compared to
normal fish, whereas a substantial gain in
function can be observed in 15dpi and 1-
month post-injured fish. Error bar indicates
values Mean 6 SEM. B–E: The line diagrams
represent swimming distance and route cov-
ered by a normal uninjured, 3dpi, 15dpi and
1-month post-injured fish, respectively, and
indicate the significant recovery in function at
1 month after SCI. S, starting point; E, end
point; arrows, direction of swimming pathway.
Fig. 2. Trichrome staining (A-C) and ultra-
structural analysis (D-I) of injured zebrafish
spinal cord. A: 1dpi cord shows infiltration of
large number of RBC (;) both at the injury epi-
center (double arrowheads) and also towards
the normal part of the cord. B: A 3dpi cord
showing less number of infiltrating R.B.C. C:
A 5dpi cord shows presence of very few
blood cells and the appearance of ependymal
bulb (epb) at the injury epicenter. A.1, B.1,
C.1: Higher magnification representation of A,
B, and C, respectively, showing the presence
of blood cells at the injury epicenter. D–G:
Presence of macrophages (ma) at the injury
epicenter in 3dpi (D–F) and 10dpi (G) cord. D,
E: Macrophage (ma) with a typical phagocytic
process (:) and in close proximity to a demye-
linating axon (dax), respectively. F: A dying
neuron (n) with condensed nuclear matter sur-
rounded by infiltrated macrophages (ma) and
a blood vessel (bv) nearby. G: Macrophage
(ma) with many lipophillic vacuoles (") and
phagocytosed myelin debris (thick arrow). H,
I: The presence of neutrophils (neu) and
monocytes (mon), respectively, in 3dpi cord.
Scale bar ¼ 250 mm (A–C), 50 mm (A.1–C.1),
5 mm (D, F), 2 mm (H, I), 1 mm (E, G).
2966 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
that in the white matter (Fig. 4A,B).
Since the volume of total white mat-
ter tissue is higher than that of total
grey matter, the total number of
BrdUþ cells in white matter is higher
than that in grey matter (Table 1A).
Here grey matter represents both the
ventricular zone and subependyma
and proliferation involves cells from
both these regions, although the rate
of proliferation in the ventricular
zone is much higher than in the sub-
ependymal zone (Fig. 4B).
When we compare the level of BrdU
incorporation in different regions of
the injured cord at different time
points after injury (Table 1B), we
observe an increased level of incorpo-
ration after 3dpi (Fig. 4C), compared
to the uninjured cord (Fig. 4A,B). An
almost equal level of BrdU incorpora-
tion is represented in white and grey
matter in the epicenter of injury. Total
BrdU incorporation shown here in the
injury epicenter is less than that in
the adjacent part (which represents a
larger area), but considering the fact
that the epicenter represents a
smaller area compared to the adjacent
part, density of BrdUþ cells in the
injury epicenter is still higher (Table
1B and Fig. 4C). The number of BrdU
incorporation still increases signifi-
cantly both in the injury epicenter
and the adjacent part in 7dpi cord
(Table 1B and Fig. 4D) when com-
pared to 3dpi cord and uninjured
cord. The number of the BrdUþ cells
increases at the injury epicenter both
in grey and white matter (Fig. 4D and
Table 1B). Similar to previous time
points, total incorporation in 7dpi
cord is higher in the adjacent zone
compared to the injury epicenter since
the adjacent part includes wider
areas than the epicenter, whereas the
actual density of the BrdUþ cells is
much higher than 3dpi cord higher at
the injury epicenter (Fig. 4D and Ta-
ble 1B). This increase in number of
BrdUþ cells at the injury epicenter in
7dpi cord may be indicative of migra-
tion of cells from the adjacent zone to
the injury epicenter (Fig. 4C, D, and
Table 1B). We have analyzed H3P
staining in regenerating cord. The
7dpi cord (Fig. 4H,I) showed many
H3Pþ cells at the injury site as well
as at the adjacent part compared to
uninjured cord (data not shown) after
giving a single pulse of BrdU for
16-hr BrdUþ cells in uninjured cord
include both slow-dividing cells with
intense labeling as well as fast-divid-
ing cells with weak labeling (Fig. 4K).
The presence of slow-dividing cells
can be confirmed further in 7dpi cord
where we used 48-hr BrdU pulse con-
tinuously after giving injury and
chased up to 7 days. The pulse-chased
7dpi cord shows the presence of slow-
dividing BrdUþ cells (Fig. 4L), which
have entered into S-phase during the
first 48 hr after injury and they are
still in S-phase after 7 days.
In all the time points after injury,
the two regions, namely the injury
epicenter and the adjacent part,
showed that the total level of incorpo-
ration is always higher around the
grey matter compared to the white
matter, unlike uninjured cord. BrdU
incorporation in 10dpi cord (Fig. 4E
and Table 1B) was also studied where
the level is lower than 7dpi cord. The
actual density of BrdU-incorporated
cells in the injury epicenter could be
still higher than the region away from
the injury site as observed in another
two time points. The rate of BrdU
incorporation slows down further in
15dpi cord in both these regions (Fig.
4F and Table 1B).
Radial Glia as Proliferating
Precursors
We observe that in the adult uninjured
cord, radial glial cells are present
TABLE 1. Time Course Analysis of BrdU Incorporation in Uninjured and Injured Spinal Corda
A. Cell proliferation in uninjured zebrafish spinal cord (total length of tissue sectioned ¼ 4 mm including injury epicenter,
thickness of section ¼ 7 mm) after 16-hr BrdU incorporation.
No. of sections counted Brduþ cells in grey matter/section Brduþ cells in white matter/section
74 (n¼6) 3.95 6 0.286 * 5.89 6 0.244 *
B. Cell proliferation in injured zebrafish spinal cord (total length of tissue sectioned ¼ 4 mm including injury epicenter,
thickness of section ¼ 7 mm) after 16-hr BrdU incorporation.
Time point
after
SCI (days)
No. of sections
counted in LS
Brduþ cells/section
in the injury
epicenter (grey matter).
Approx. 300 mm
Brduþ cells/section
in the injury
epicenter (white
matter). Approx.
300 mm
Brduþ cells/section
in adjacent normal
part (grey matter).
Approx. 1,800 mm
both rostral
and caudal
Brduþ cells/section
in adjacent normal
part (white matter).
Approx. 1,800 mm
both rostral
and caudal
3 day 79 (n¼6) 4.02 6 0.142 ** 3.97 6 0.259 ** 20.05 6 0.563 7.86 6 0.326
7 day 86 (n¼6) 14.96 6 0.362*,** 11.13 6 0.402*,** 28.02 6 0.522* 12.96 6 0.239*
10 day 76 (n¼6) 6.86 6 0.158 6.03 6 0.209 11.65 6 0.486 10.56 6 0.365
15 day 72 (n¼6) 3.76 6 0.128 3.25 6 0.153 9.86 6 0.518 7.08 6 0.324
aValues are represented as Mean 6 SEM
*P<0.001, between total count of 7 day post injured cord versus uninjured cord.
**P<0.01, between total count of injury epicenter of 7 day versus 3 day.
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2967
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
around the ependymal canal and are
strongly GFAP positive. Approxi-
mately 6.9% of the total populations
are radial glia in an uninjured cord.
All the cells around the ependymal
canal are not radial glia as these are
GFAP/DAPIþ cells (Fig. 5A). Among
the radial glia some (1.4% of total cell
populations) are BrdUþ even in unin-
jured cord (Fig. 5B). Most of the
BrdUþ radial glia are slow, although a
small population of slow-dividing cells
is not radial glia (Fig. 5D.1, E). Imme-
diately after injury, 3dpi cord showed
a down-regulation of GFAP expression
at the injury epicenter (Fig. 5H) com-
pared to uninjured cord (Fig. 5D) and
the immediate adjacent area of the
injury epicenter was weakly stained.
In later time points, there was a reap-
pearance of GFAPþ cells with a moder-
ate increase in the level of expression
in day 7 (Fig. 5I), followed by a higher
level in day 15 (Fig. 5J), and a near to
normal level of expression in 1-month
post-injured cord (data not shown).
We have also identified three differ-
ent populations of cells, BrdUþ/GFAPþ,
BrdUþ/GFAP, and BrdU/GFAPþ,
both in uninjured cord and in injured
cord but their percentage varies in
injured cord (Fig. 5D–J, a–d). The pie
chart represents the relative percent-
age of colocalized cells (BrdUþ/GFAPþ,
BrdUþ/GFAP, BrdU/GFAPþ, and
DAPIþ) in uninjured and injured cord.
Numbers of different population of
cells are counted in the sections from
two spinal cords at each time point.
Data on the counts of different popula-
tions are mentioned in Supplemental
Figure S1 (which is available online).
It has been observed that approxi-
mately 1.2 and 1.6% cells are both
BrdUþ/GFAPþ in 3dpi (Fig. 5H, H.1,
and b) and 7dpi (Fig. 5I, I.1, I.2, c)
cord, respectively, which are more or
less similar to uninjured cord, indicat-
ing that this particular population of
cells is probably being maintained in
both uninjured and injured cord
Fig. 4. Time course analysis of injury-induced cell proliferation represented after BrdU incorporation and H3P staining in uninjured and injured spinal
cord. A, B: Uninjured cord shows BrdUþ cells are present both in grey matter (!) and white matter (!) but mostly in ependyma (ep). C: 3dpi cord
shows a large increase in BrdUþ cells in both grey (!) and white (!) matter. D: A section of 7dpi cord shows a very significant increase in number
of BrdUþ cells in both grey (!) and white matter (!), and increased numbers of cells are present at the injury epicenter ([down bracket]) compared
to 3dpi cord. E: A 10dpi cord shows incorporation in both white matter (!) and grey matter (!) but a considerable decrease in number of BrdUþ
cells compared to 7dpi cord. F: A 15dpi cord section shows fewer BrdUþ cells in grey (!) and white matter (!) compared to the 10dpi cord and
the number is still higher than in the uninjured cord. G: Quantitative representation of BrdUþ cells in both grey and white matter of uninjured and
injured cord at different time points. H: A 7dpi cord section shows BrdUþ cells (!) and many of these are colocalized with H3P (;) in both the injury
epicenter ([down-bracket]) and adjacent part. H.1, H.2: Same 7dpi cord as in H showing adjacent area and injury epicenter, respectively, at high mag-
nification. I, J: Another representative cross-section of 7dpi cord showing distribution of H3Pþ cells ( ) around the central canal (c) and DIC of same
section. K: Ependyma of uninjured cord showing both slow-dividing (thick arrow) and fast-dividing (_) cells. L: Section of 7dpi cord showing BrdUþ
slow-dividing cells (thick arrow) after 48-hr continuous BrdU pulse. Scale bar ¼ 400 mm (A–H), 20 mm (H.1–K), 200 mm (L).
2968 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
continuously. Most importantly, the
population of BrdUþ/GFAPþ cells that
are represented both in 7dpi cord (Fig.
5I.1) and uninjured cord (Fig. 5D.1)
are predominantly slow. There is an
increase in both slow- and fast-dividing
cells in 7 dpi cord, the relative propor-
tion of fast-dividing BrdUþ cells being
much higher and mostly GFAP nega-
tive (Fig. 5F).
After injury there is a rapid
increase in the percentage of another
population of cells, BrdUþ/GFAP , in
both 3dpi (8.5% of the total cells
counted) and in 7dpi cord (11%) (Fig.
Fig. 5. Immunohistochemical staining of GFAP and BrdU in zebrafish uninjured (A,B, D,E, D.1, and D.2) and injured (C, F, H–J, H.1, I.1, and J.1) spinal
cord. A, B: Uninjured cord section showing that a percentage of DAPIþ cells are GFAPþ radial glia (arrowhead) and the presence of BrdUþ cells (thick
arrow) around the central canal; some colocalize with GFAP (!). C: 7dpi cord section shows a greater number of BrdUþ cells around the central canal
than normal; a few colocalized with GFAP (!). D: Uninjured cord showing high GFAP expression and the presence of few BrdUþ cells. Same cord at a
higher magnification showing different radial glial population, GFAPþ/BrdUþ (:) and GFAP/BrdUþ (thick arrow) cells (D.1) and GFAPþ/BrdU cells (!)
(D.2), respectively. E: Ependyma of uninjured cord showing many more slow-dividing cells (!), some of which are radial glia and a few fast-dividing cell.
F: 7dpi cord representing many BrdUþ, fast-dividing cells that are GFAP (_) and fewer slow-dividing cells (!) around ependyma. G: Control section
stained without GFAP primary antibody. H: 3dpi cord, showing proliferating BrdUþ cells; only some are GFAPþ. Also shown is a loss of GFAP expression
at the injury epicenter ([down-bracket]) and at an immediately adjacent part of the cord. H.1: Same cord as in H at higher magnification showing both
GFAPþ/BrdUþ (:) and GFAP/BrdUþ (thick arrow) cells. I: 7dpi cord showing high proliferation, a low level of GFAP expression at the injury epicenter, and
little higher level of GFAP expression at the immediate adjacent area. I.1: Same cord at higher magnification shows presence of GFAPþ/BrdUþ (:),
GFAP/BrdUþ (thick arrow) and GFAPþ/ BrdU (!) cell populations. I.2: Same cord shows the presence of many GFAPþ/BrdUþ (:) cells. J: Fifteen-day
regenerated cord shows a reduced BrdU incorporation but a high level of GFAP expression in both the uninjured part and the injury epicenter. J.1: Same
section at higher magnification also represents three populations. a–d: The pie chart represents the percentage of three cell populations and DAPIþ cells
in adult uninjured (a), 3dpi (b), 7dpi (c), and 15dpi (d) cord, respectively. Scale bar¼ 250 mm (D and H–J), 20 mm (A–C, E–G, D.1–J.1).
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2969
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
5H,I, b,c). However, at a later time
point like 15dpi cord, BrdUþ/GFAP
cells are significantly decreased to
3.4% (Fig. 5J, d). This is suggestive of
the presence of a different population
of proliferating precursors namely
BrdUþ/GFAPþ cells, which are radial
glia but their percentage remains the
same before and after injury, whereas
the second population of BrdUþ/
GFAP cells are most important and
exist during regeneration in a much
higher proportion.
A third population of cells, BrdU/
GFAPþ, is also present both in unin-
jured (Fig. 5D.2) and injured cord (Fig.
5I.1, J.1). There is a decrease in
BrdU/GFAPþ cell numbers after
injury, both in 3 and 7dpi cord (approx-
imately 3–4% of the total population)
compared to uninjured cord (5.5% of
total population). They are non-divid-
ing radial glia and their population
has decreased following injury.
Neurogenesis: Expression of
Neuronal Markers
We have used different markers to
identify different neuronal populations
present in uninjured and regenerating
cord. Immunohistochemical staining
with beta III tubulin showed the pres-
ence of different types of neurons.
These include more dorsally placed
sensory neurons, a variety of medially
placed interneurons, and more ven-
trally placed motor neurons in unin-
jured cord (Fig. 6A; Appel and Chitnis,
2002; Wilson et al., 2002). There is
extensive loss of neurons in 3dpi cord
(Fig. 6B) and replacement of neurons
at the injury epicenter 1 month after
regeneration as observed by beta III
tubulin staining (Fig. 6C). We have con-
firmed the presence of newly generated
neurons in subependyma with another
neuronal marker-Hu in 10dpi cord
(Fig. 6H–J). Both uninjured (Fig. 6D–
G) and injured cord (Fig. 6H–K)
showed the presence of neurons in the
subependyma, as confirmed by luxol
fast blue and cresyl violet staining (Fig.
6G and K) and their relative position
across the dorso-ventral axis (Fig. 6D,E
and H,I). Newly formed neurons are
present in all three positions like dor-
sal, medial, and ventral, similar to
uninjured cord. Distinctive morphologi-
cal characteristics of sensory, inter-
neuron, and motor neurons cannot be
distinguished in injured cord, as these
are small and similar in size and not
yet fully differentiated. Since beta III
tubulin is expressed only in mature
post-mitotic neurons, we have used
markers like Hu and NeuroD to under-
stand neuronal differentiation during
regeneration. Both Hu protein, which
is known to be expressed very early
during neuronal differentiation in
zebrafish (Kim et al., 1996; Park et al.,
2000), and NeuroD, a marker for neu-
ronally determined cells (Korzh et al.,
1998), were used to show the nature
and time of appearance of newly formed
neurons in regenerating cord. Both
uninjured and injured cords do express
Hu protein (Fig. 6D–F, 6H–J and Fig.
7A–D). Staining with Hu antibody in
the 7dpi cord, when we see highest rate
of proliferation showed positive cells
both in the injury epicenter as well as
in the normal part of the cord (Fig. 7D;
Supp. Fig. S2P–U). Huþ/BrdUþ cells
can be localized both in the ependymal
and subependymal zone with a higher
percentage in the subependymal zone
(Fig. 7D, D.1), whereas in the uninjured
part of the same cord Hu-positive cells
are present only in the subependymal
zone (Fig. 7D). Unusual subpial local-
ization of Huþ/BrdUþ cells is also seen
in injured cord (Fig. 7D.3). There are
many Huþ/BrdUþ cells in the injury
epicenter and in the immediate adja-
cent part, which are small with little
condensed cytoplasm (Fig. 7D.1, D.4,
D.5; Supp. Fig. S2R and X, respec-
tively). We observed that among the
Huþ/BrdUþ cells many are fast divid-
ing and few are slow dividing (Fig.
7D.5a–d). Some cells that are Huþ/
BrdU can also be recognized in both
the injury epicenter (Fig. 7D.1, Supp.
Fig. S2R) and immediate adjacent part
(Fig. 7D.4, Supp. Fig. S2X), because
Huþ cells represent a newly formed
progeny of neuronal lineage that have
just exited from cell cycle. We have also
analyzed NeuroD expression at differ-
ent time points. There is no expression
of this particular protein at 7dpi cord
(data not shown) although these
NeuroD cells are Huþ and are present
in both the injury epicenter and the
normal part of the cord. The first
appearance of NeuroDþ cells in the
injury epicenter can be seen at 10dpi
cord and some are co-localized with Hu
(Fig. 7B, B.1; Supp. Fig. S2D–F). We
also confirm this result with histological
analysis of 10dpi cord (Figs. 1F.1, 6K)
where we see the reappearance of the
neuronal cell body at the injury epicen-
ter. The expression of NeuroD is tran-
sient and cannot be seen in 15dpi cord.
Co-localized expression of NeuroD and
Hu protein revealed the presence of the
newly specified neurons, which are still
smaller in size in the injury epicenter at
10dpi cord, although some showed pro-
jections (Fig. 7B.1). The newly specified
neurons with Huþ/NeuroDþ expression
can also be seen in the immediate adja-
cent part of the injury epicenter, with
an obviously smaller number than
Huþ/NeuroD cells (Fig. 7B.2, Supp.
Fig. S2G–I). Ultrastructure analysis of
10dpi cord also confirmed the presence
of dividing neuronal progenitors (Fig.
7E) and 1-month regenerates showed
the presence of both mature motor neu-
rons and newly generated neurons with
little cytoplasm containing new but
fewer organelles (Fig. 7F–H).
Cell Death in Spinal Cord
Injury
We have performed TUNEL and cas-
pase-3 analysis to investigate the role
of apoptotic cell death after SCI in
zebrafish (Fig. 8). TUNEL analysis at
different time points revealed that ap-
optotic cell death was occurring at the
injury site, where the first appear-
ance of TUNEL-positive cells was evi-
dent at around 6 hr post-injury (Fig.
8A). At 1dpi, many cells are positive
compared to 6 hr post-injured cord,
indicative of cell death in higher num-
bers (Fig. 8B). The number of apopto-
tic cells decreases at 3dpi cord (Fig.
8C) and is almost absent in 7dpi cord
(data not shown), when compared to
1dpi cord (Fig. 8B). Morphological ob-
servation of the labeled cells revealed
nuclear fragmentation as evident in
many cells (Fig. 8B.1).
We have confirmed TUNEL results
with another apoptotic cell death
marker caspase-3, which is known to
be expressed during neuronal and
glial loss after SCI in mammals (Cit-
ron et al., 2000; Takagi et al., 2003).
Although a weak expression of cas-
pase-3 starts as early as 6 hr and is
present at 12 hr post-injury (data not
shown), the highest level can be seen
in 1dpi cord with higher intensity and
cell numbers than at the previous
time points (Fig. 8D–E). Afterwards
2970 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
the level of expression and number of
caspase-3-positive cells decline in
3dpi cord (data not shown). Immuno-
chemistry data were confirmed
further by ELISA analysis (Fig. 8I).
Ultrastructural analysis revealed ap-
optotic cell death in neurons (Fig. 8F
and G) where condensed nuclear mat-
ter with an apoptotic body can be rec-
ognized. Mitochondria-associated apo-
ptotic cell death can also be observed
in 3dpi cord as we see dying mito-
chondria in the cytoplasm of an apo-
ptotic neuron (Fig. 8H).
DISCUSSION
Cellular Response to Injury
We have characterized the cellular
events to understand (1) the extent of
similarity or difference in the cellular
responses to trauma in zebrafish cord
Fig. 6. Immunohistochemical staining of b-III tubulin (A–C), Hu (D–F and H–J), and counter-staining of Luxol fast blue/Cresyl violet (G and K) in
zebrafish uninjured (A, D–G) and injured spinal cord (B,C, and H–K). A: Section of uninjured cord shows the spatial distribution of different types of
neurons sensory neurons (white !), interneurons close to ependyma (yellow !), and motorneurons (red !). A.1, A.2, A.3: Higher magnification of
indicated areas of A showing different types of neurons. B: 3dpi cord section showing the loss of mature neurons at the injury epicenter. C: One
month post-injured cord section showing regenerated neurons at the injury epicenter. C.1, C.2: Higher magnification of indicated areas in C, where
formation of new neurons (thick arrow) both at the dorsal and ventral sides can be seen. D–F: Sections of uninjured cord showing the distribution
of Huþ neurons (thick arrow) in the subependyma (sep) along the D-V axis. G: Luxol fast blue/Cresyl violet staining of F. H–J: Sections from 10dpi
cord showing the presence of Huþ newly formed neurons (thick arrow) in different locations along the D-V axis. K: Staining of the same section in
J with Luxol fast blue/Cresyl violet. Scale bar ¼ 250 mm (A–C), 50 mm (A.1–A.3, C.1,C.2, D–K).
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2971
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
Fig. 7. Immunohistochemical localization of Hu, NeuroD, and BrdU (A–D) and ultrastructural analysis (E–H) in zebrafish spinal cord. A: Uninjured spinal
cord shows the presence of many Huþ cells (thick arrow) in subependyma, which are NeuroD. B: The 10dpi cord section shows Huþ cells (thick arrow) at
the injured site (!!) and a few of these are NeuroDþ (~). B.1, B.2: Higher magnification of indicated areas in B showing both populations of cells in the
injury epicenter and the immediate adjacent part, respectively. Note that newly generated neurons extend projections (side arrow). C: Uninjured cord show-
ing many subependymal Huþ cells (thick arrow) and very few of them are BrdUþ (_). C.1: At higher magnification, the same section as in C showing both
Huþ/BrdU cells (thick arrow) and Huþ/BrdUþ cell (_).D: The 7dpi cord section shows only BrdUþ cells (!) both at the injury epicenter and in the immediate
adjacent part of the epicenter. In both these regions, the number of Huþ/BrdUþ cells (_) are higher than the normal uninjured cord and are also present close
to the pial membrane at the injured site (!!).D.1–D.4: Same as D at higher magnification showing the presence of Huþ/BrdUþ (_), Huþ/BrdU thick arrow),
and Hu/BrdUþ (thin arrow) cells in the injury epicenter (D.1), adjacent normal part (D.2), subpial location (D.3), and the immediate adjacent part of epicenter
(D.4) respectively. D.5: Represent the presence of both slow (bold arrow) and fast ( ) population (D.5b) of Huþ cells in both ependyma (ep) and subepen-
dyma (sep) (D.5a) and their respective merge (D.5c) and DIC (D.5d). E: 10dpi cord showing dividing neuronal progenitor cells (pc) at the injury site. F: One-
month post-injured cord shows the presence of both newly formed neuron (n) and specified motor neuron (mn). G: Higher magnification picture of newly
formed neuron (n) with a small cytoplasmic area (cy) and a few cytoplasmic organelles (white arrowhead). H: Higher magnification picture of specified motor
neuron with a large volume of cytoplasm and many cytoplasmic organelles (white arrowhead). Scale bar ¼ 200 mm (A–D), 20 mm (B.1–D.3), 10 mm (D.4), 2
mm (E–H).
2972 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
and mammalian cord and (2) what are
the neuroprotective and regenerative
responses following SCI in adult zebra-
fish. We observed hemorrhage, tissue
edema, blood cell infiltration, and loss of
neurons and glia following SCI. There is
an influx of so-called inflammatory cells,
like neutrophils, monocytes, and macro-
phages immediately after injury. As in
mammals, these events occur early af-
ter injury but do not continue for long.
Macrophages are important contribu-
tors of inflammatory response in mam-
mals and may have both neuroprotec-
tive and neurodegenerative role in
spinal cord injury and repair (Bethea,
2000; Shechter et al., 2009) because of
the presence of distinctly different
Fig. 8. TUNEL staining (A–C), caspase-3 immunohistochemistry (D–E), ultrastructural analysis (F–H), and quantification of caspase-3 (I) in injured zebra-
fish spinal cord. A: The 6-hr post-injured spinal cord section shows the presence of apoptotic TUNEL-positive cells (thin arrow) both at the injury epicenter
(!!) and immediate adjacent part. B: The 1dpi cord shows many TUNEL-positive cells (thin arrow) close to the injury epicenter. B.1: The higher magnifi-
cation picture of B shows many apoptotic cells (thin arrow) and a cell with fragmented nuclear matter (up white arrowhead). C: The 3dpi cord section
shows less TUNEL-positive cells (thin arrow) compared to 1dpi cord. D, E: 1dpi cord section shows the presence of many caspase-3-positive apoptotic
cells (thin arrow) at the injury epicenter with respective DIC. D.1: Higher magnification of same section shows some caspase-3 positive cells (thin arrow).
F–H: Representative pictures of different apoptotic neurons in 3dpi cord, showing apoptotic neuron (AN) surrounded by macrophages (ma, F), another
showing a fragmented nucleus (thick arrow) and retracted cytoplasm (G), and a third showing dying mitochondria (right white arrowhead) within the cyto-
plasm (H). I:Quantification of caspase-3 protein in uninjured and injured zebrafish spinal cord. Mouse day-13.5 forelimb represented positive control. Scale
bar¼ 200 mm (A–E), 50 mm (D.1), 10 mm (B.1), 2 mm (F,G), 1 mm (H).
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2973
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
populations of pro-inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory macrophages (Kigerl
et al., 2009, Shechter et al., 2009).
In the case of zebrafish, phagocytic
macrophages accumulate at the lesion
site 3 days after injury and continue to
stay in decreasing numbers at 10dpi
cord. These cells are involved in clearing
cellular debris like dying neurons and
damaged axons thatmay contain axonal
inhibitory molecules as myelin break-
down products, probably causing sup-
pression of an inflammatory response.
Phagocytic macrophage activation
enhances myelination by playing an im-
portant role in myelin debris removal,
which is usually generated during de-
myelination. A previous report based on
the spatio-temporal distribution of
microglia/macrophage in injured fish
brain suggested their possible role in
clearance of apoptotic cells indirectly
(Zupanc et al., 2003). Our ultrastructure
analysis provided more definite evi-
dence that the macrophages are indeed
clearing myelin debris and apoptotic
neurons. Thus it is possible that all the
beneficial properties of macrophages,
like secretion of neurotrophic factors
(our unpublished observation), debris
clearance through phagocytosis, and
promotion of remyelination could con-
tribute to an efficient repair process in
zebrafish spinal cord after injury.
Ependymal Sealing Is a
Regenerative Response, an
Important Criterion of
Successful Spinal Cord
Regeneration
The initiation of regenerative response
is observed as an accumulation of cells
at the injury site and ependymal seal-
ing in regenerating zebrafish spinal
cord. Ependymal sealing can be seen
in both crush and transection injury
(data not shown) in zebrafish. A simi-
lar mechanism of migration and accu-
mulation of cells here may also involve
epithelial to mesenchymal transition
as observed by O’Hara et al. (1992) and
Chernoff (1996) in urodele. Sealing of
ependyma during spinal cord regener-
ation was also confirmed in other
regeneration-competent species in
both adult and larval stages (Ferretti
et al., 2003, Zhang et al., 2003, Chern-
off et al., 2003). It is thought to be a
common process both in tail amputa-
tion and spinal cord transection in uro-
deles (Butler and Ward, 1967; Singer
et al., 1979; Stensaas, 1983). In the
case of zebrafish, even crush injury,
which involves ependymal disruption,
can cause ependymal sealing and for-
mation of the ependymal bulb. Our evi-
dence also suggests the importance of
ependymal sealing in spinal cord
regeneration, since it was shown in an
earlier study that delayed and imper-
fect sealing of ependyma at the lesion
site by ependymal cells is an important
contributing factor leading to loss of
the regeneration capacity of post-meta-
morphic frog after telencephalic injury
(Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004).
Demyelination and
Remyelination, Role of the
Schwann Cell
Following injury, axons are severed and
cells in the white matter may die. Ultra-
structural analysis and luxol fast blue
staining confirm demyelination of axons
following injury, causing severe loss of
functions and thus we observed paraly-
sis of the posterior part of the body and
loss of swimming movements. We
observed the extensive presence of
Schwann cells at the injury site, which
are dividing and indeed remyelinating
denuded axons through basal mem-
brane in regenerating cord. At least
some of the regenerated axons showed
remyelination by Schwann cells, which
have contributed to functional recovery.
A similar role of Schwann cells in myeli-
nation was also reported previously in
injured goldfish optic nerve (Nona
et al., 2000). Schwann cells of unknown
origin are thought to infiltrate the
lesion site, which gives rise to periph-
eral-type myelination in the regener-
ated optic nerve (Nona et al., 1994). We
cannot confirm the origin or source of
Schwann cells in regenerating zebrafish
spinal cord but dividing Schwann cells
are present around the demyelinated
axons, which are known to be essential
for the onset of myelination (Nona
et al., 2000).
Apoptotic Cell Death
Secondary injury mechanism can lead
to apoptotic cell death and contribute
to both neuronal and glial loss in mam-
malian cord (Liu et al., 1997; Li et al.,
1999; Newcomb et al., 1999). Time
course analysis of two different apopto-
tic markers in zebrafish injured cord
revealed induction of apoptotic cell
death as early as 6 hr following injury
with the highest level seen at 1dpi, and
this is similar to what is observed in
mammalian SCI (McEwen and
Springer, 2005). Subsequently, there is
a reduced level of cell death in injured
fish cord, unlike mammals where cas-
pase-3 expression continues until 8dpi
(McEwen and Springer, 2005). Ultra-
structural analysis showed the pres-
ence of an apoptotic body in the nu-
cleus and dying mitochondria, which
are considered to be typical character-
istic features of apoptotic neurons,
thus confirming neuronal apoptosis fol-
lowing injury. Although apoptotic cell
death involves both grey matter and
white matter, the extent of cell death is
much greater in grey matter compared
to white matter.
Previously, cell death in post-embry-
onic fish CNSwas considered to be non-
existent (Fox and Richardson, 1982;
Fine, 1989; Waxman and Anderson,
1985). Another report later showed
that apoptotic cell death is required to
control the cell proliferation in cerebel-
lum (Soutschek and Zupanc, 1996). In
adult teleost brain, apoptotic cell death
occurs during neuronal regeneration
(Zupanc et al., 1998), which leads to
rapid removal and clearance of dam-
aged cells, consequently augmenting
the regeneration process. Until now,
there has been no report of apoptotic
cell death in zebrafish spinal cord. Our
data confirm that injured spinal cord
involves an apoptotic mechanism of de-
bris clearance similar to that of brain
and thus inhibits the progression of
secondary degeneration after injury.
Injury-Induced Proliferation
and Neurogenesis
We observed significant injury-
induced proliferation in zebrafish spi-
nal cord after being injured as
reported by Reimer et al. (2008). How-
ever, temporal sequence of injury-
induced proliferation in our study dif-
fers from their observation probably
because of the variation in the nature
of the injury induced since we have
used crush injury as compared to
transection. Cells around the epen-
dyma and subependyma include both
neuronal and radial glial cells and
show a higher rate of BrdU
2974 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
incorporation and H3Pþ cells, suggest-
ing the contribution of both ependymal
and subependymal cells in the regen-
erative process. Cells immediately
around the ependymal canal (i.e., ven-
tricular zone) represent the highest
rate of proliferation as reported by us
and others (Reimer et al., 2008). Pro-
liferation may also involve white mat-
ter cells, but at a very low level. Unin-
jured cord reveals very few
proliferating cells and injury causes
significant proliferation as early as
day 3 post-injury, which continues to
rise until day 7 and declines at later
time points. There is also a regional
variation of proliferation; it involves
both injury epicenter and the adjacent
part of the cord as evidenced by both
BrdU incorporation and H3Pþ cells.
Initiation of proliferation starts at the
site of injury as well as away from the
stump and later proliferating cells
migrate towards injury epicenter. Pre-
vious work in urodele spinal cord men-
tioned that the proliferation involves
ependymal tissue somewhat distant to
the plane of amputation (Egar and
Singer, 1972; Nordlander and Singer
1978; Zhang et al., 2000) and that
there was the presence of migrating
proliferating precursors (Ferretti
et al., 2003). We confirm injury-
induced proliferative response as
observed by others (Egar and Singer,
1972; Nordlander and Singer, 1978;
Zhang et al., 2000; Monaghan et al.,
2007) and proliferation as a key event
in initiation and maintenance of re-
generative response in zebrafish spi-
nal cord.
Role of Radial Glia as
Progenitor and in
Dedifferentiation
Radial glial cells have distinct mor-
phological features and well-defined
glial characteristics (Holder et al.,
1990; Cameron and Rakic, 1991) and
are the most widespread non-neuro-
nal cell type in developing CNS. There
is a renewed attention to these cells,
because of their ever increasing role
in developmental processes including
their function as neuronal precursors
(Campbell and Gotz, 2002). These
cells persist in adulthood in CNS of
non-mammalian vertebrates ranging
from fish to bird (Alvarez-Buyella
et al., 2002; Kalman, 2002; Garcia-
Verdugo et al., 2002; Zupanc and
Clint, 2003) and most interestingly
they remain in the areas where consti-
tutive adult neurogenesis is an estab-
lished phenomenon. Adult uninjured
zebrafish cords have radial glia and
astrocytes and do express GFAP. How-
ever, the radial glial population can be
readily recognized (either dividing or
nondividing) because of their obvious
morphological characteristics, BrdUþ
nucleus during division, and soma of
these cells that are located around the
ependyma. Among the total popula-
tion of radial glial cells, 1.2–1.6% is
proliferating and present in both
uninjured and injured cord. These
particular populations of GFAPþ/
BrdUþ cells are probably neurogenic
and are slowly dividing.
There is a decrease of GFAP expres-
sion immediately after injury and
lack of expression of GFAP could not
be attributed to loss of tissue due to
injury since both 3dpi and 7dpi cord
showed some accumulation of cells
around the injury epicenter. Observa-
tion by others confirms a similar na-
ture of expression of GFAP where
they showed initial loss after injury
followed by an increased level of
expression at later time points in uro-
dele cord (O’Hara et al., 1992; Chern-
off et al., 2003).
We observed injury-induced prolifer-
ation and a higher percentage of prolif-
erating precursors were GFAP/BrdUþ
in 3dpi and 7dpi cord. This population
may refer to the importance of an early
dedifferentiation process, which is fol-
lowed by proliferation. These GFAP/
BrdUþ cells are fast dividing and repre-
sent the highest percentage of prolifer-
ating cells after injury. They could rep-
resent dedifferentiating cells and hence
do not express differentiation markers
of radial glia. A similar response of
GFAPþ astrocytes to mechanical injury
was reported in mammalian brain
(Hampton et al., 2004) where an initial
dip in GFAPþ cells does not represent
the loss of astrocytes but confirms the
presence of GFAP astrocytes that are
actually dedifferentiated and prolifer-
ating. Others interpreted the absence
of GFAP after stab wounds in mam-
mals as the presence of proliferating
glial precursors (Alonso, 2005) that
would differentiate into mature
astrocytes.
The third population, which is
GFAPþ/BrdU, consists of nonprolifer-
ating radial glia present in uninjured
cord at a higher level than injured
cord. A subset of this particular popu-
lation may become GFAP/BrdUþ af-
ter injury, when they are dedifferenti-
ating and we see a drop in GFAP
expression, followed by the reappear-
ance of the same percentage of GFAPþ/
BrdU cells at 15dpi. There is the pres-
ence of both slow- and fast-dividing ra-
dial glia in zebrafish cord, of which a
slow-dividing self-renewing population
exists both in injured and uninjured
cord, whereas a higher percentage of
fast-dividing cells are represented in
injured cord initially. Fast-dividing ra-
dial glia may divide symmetrically,
generating cells of specific lineage.
Thus, the importance of radial glia as
precursors is enormous, since these
cells can ideally generate both glial
and neuronal populations and main-
tain the radial glial pool through self-
renewal (Pinto and Gotz, 2007) as hap-
pens in cortical neurogenesis. Radial
glial cells proliferate throughout verte-
brate neurogenesis and identity of
their progeny may vary (Hartfuss
et al., 2001; Malatesta et al., 2000;
Miyata et al., 2001). In urodeles, the
radial glia generate diverse lineages
and thus form glia, neurons, and neu-
ral crest cells after amputation of the
adult tail (Echeverri and Tanaka,
2002).
Neurogenesis and Neuronal
Differentiation
Fish CNS is capable of neurogenesis
in adult life after injury and shows a
remarkable ability for neural regener-
ation (Zupanc, 1999, 2001; Zupanc
et al., 2005; Reimer et al., 2008).
Studies on neurogenesis in spinal
cord are still scarce (Kaslin et al.,
2008) and little is known about the or-
igin, fate, and differentiation of the
produced cells, their survival as well
as functional integration. Our data
indicate substantial loss of neurons at
the injury site immediately after
injury and these cells are replaced
during the process of regeneration in
the same site as evidenced by histol-
ogy, ultrastructural analysis, and
expression of neuronal precursor
markers. Expression of Hu protein in
the cells present at the injury
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2975
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
epicenter marks the presence of
newly committed early postmitotic
neuronal cells, and also those cells
that have just left the cell cycle (Huþ/
Brduþ). These cells are present in
greater number in the injury epicenter
and are phenotypically different from
Huþ cells in uninjured cord as con-
firmed by ultrastructural analysis and
are contributing to neurogenesis in
the regenerating cord. Initially, the
same Huþ cells are not determined
and hence NeuroD. Later on in 10dpi
cord, at least some of these Huþ cells
would become neuronally determined
and NeuroDþ. We also observe that
few Huþ/NeuroDþ cells are present in
the ventricular zone of the ependyma
in both the injury epicenter and in the
immediate adjacent parts, and would
probably migrate to acquire a sub-
ependymal position and integrate into
a fully regenerated cord. Some cells
are also appropriately present in the
subependyma showing projections and
integrated into the regenerating cord.
Subpial location of newly generated
neurons can also be seen in the injured
cord. Similar reports on post-embry-
onic zebrafish brain (Mueller and Wul-
limann, 2002) showed subpial neuro-
genesis, where there is high neuronal
plasticity suggesting injury-induced
neurogenesis in zebrafish cord.
The radial glia undergoes asymmet-
ric division to generate neurons during
cortical neurogenesis (Pinto and Gotz,
2007), whereas radial glia in trans-
ected adult fish cord generates motor
neurons (Reimer et al., 2008). We
observed neurogenesis in injured spi-
nal cord and a subset of radial glial
population are, indeed, slowly dividing,
which may generate new neurons
through asymmetric division. Since
the newly formed neurons are coming
from both fast- and slow-dividing cells,
it is possible that these cells are com-
ing from asymmetrically dividing ra-
dial glia and a higher percentage of
fast-dividing population may have gen-
erated from symmetric division, and
include different neuronal progenitors.
Our data suggest that in adult
regenerating spinal cord, both prolif-
erating neuronal precursors (Huþ/
Brduþ) and neuronally determined
cells (Huþ/NeuroDþ) are present in
the injury epicenter and immediate
adjacent parts of the injury epicenter
suggestive of neurogenesis in both
these regions. The presence of newly
formed neurons (Huþ/BrdUþ) after
injury is more evident because of
their morphology. They are small
round cells with a large nucleus and
relatively small cytoplasm containing
new but fewer organelles, a typical
characteristic of newly formed neu-
rons, as confirmed by ultrastructural
analysis (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1998).
In conclusion, we are the first to
characterize the injury-induced cellu-
lar responses in zebrafish spinal cord.
Unlike mammals, some of these
responses do not contribute to second-
ary degeneration like apoptotic cell
death and macrophage invasion and
others contribute to the creation of a
permissive environment for regenera-
tion. Proliferative response after
injury is crucial and our study shows
that SCI can lead to generation of
new neurons as well as their time
course and differentiation during
regeneration. We showed the role of
radial glia as proliferating precursor
in neurogenesis. In the future, it will
be important to study the role of sig-
naling molecules for the creation of a
regeneration permissive environ-
ment. Intense characterization of pre-
cursor cells needs to be done in order
to elucidate the molecular basis of
regeneration.
EXPERIMENTAL
PROCEDURES
Fish Maintenance
Zebrafish of approximately of 3–4 cm
in length were obtained either from a
local pet shop or bred in our animal
house facility. Fish were kept in sepa-
rate groups of 10 in the aquatic sys-
tem maintained at 28C on a 14-hr
light/10-hr dark cycle.
Surgical Procedures for
Inflicting Spinal Cord Injury
to Adult Fish
Fishes were anaesthetized for 5 min
in 0.02% tricaine (MS222; Sigma, St.
Louis, MO) before giving spinal cord
injury (SCI). A longitudinal lesion
was made at the side of the fish to ex-
pose the vertebral column at the level
of the dorsal fin, which corresponds to
the 15–16th vertebrae as confirmed
by skeletal preparation. The spinal
cord was crushed by dorso-ventral
crushing for 1 sec with a number-5
Dumont forceps. Giving a suture later
sealed wounds and fishes were
allowed to regenerate at 28C for dif-
ferent time periods.
BrdU Incorporation
We injected 50 ml volume of BrdU
(Bromo-deoxy- Uridine, Sigma-
Aldrich) at the concentration 2.5 mg/
ml to adult fish intraperitoneally, 16
hr before the collection of tissues at
different time points. To detect the
slow cycling cells, we have used con-
tinuous BrdU pulse for the first 48 hr
after injury and then chased the same
fish until day 7. A spinal cord tissue
equivalent to approximately 4 mm
length was collected from both injured
and uninjured animals. Tissue sam-
ples from injured cord were collected
in such a way that the epicenter of
the lesion was placed at the middle of
the cord and included normal tissues
on both sides of the injury. Tissues
were processed for BrdU immunohis-
tochemistry and labeled cells were
counted in the sections of approxi-
mately 4 mm length from both injured
and uninjured spinal cord.
Histology, Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM),
and Immunohistochemistry
Spinal cord tissues were dissected out
and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
(Sigma) for 8 hr or overnight at 4C.
Both injured and uninjured spinal
cord tissues were embedded either in
paraffin or in a mixture of PEG and
hexadecanol (9:1, Sigma) or in O.C.T
compound (Leica) and sectioned at 5–
7 mm. For routine histology, sections
were stained either with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E), Mallory’s trichrome
stain (Humason, 1979), or luxol fast
blue and cresyl violet.
For TEM, both normal and injured
adult spinal cords were dissected out
from bony skeleton and 2-mm-length
tissue was excised from whole spinal
cord containing injury epicenter in
case of injured tissue. Tissues were
quickly fixed in Karnovsky’s fixative
for 12 hr in 4C (David et al., 1973). Af-
ter washing with 0.2M phosphate
buffer (pH 7.4), tissues were osmicated
in 1% OsO4 in 0.01M phosphate buffer
2976 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
and embedded in Araldite CY212.
Ultrathin sections (70 nm) were cut
using an ultramicrotome (Leica, Wet-
zlar, Germany) and were stained with
uranyl acetate and lead citrate and
viewed under a Morgagni 268D elec-
tron microscope (Fei Company, Eind-
hoven, Netherlands) using a multihole
grid.
Immunostaining was performed as
described previously (Ferretti and
Ghosh, 1997) by using the following
primary antibodies shown to specifi-
cally recognize fish, amphibian, and
human protein: anti glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), rabbit polyclo-
nal antibody (1:500, DAKO, Carpinte-
ria, CA), anti-b III Tubulin, mouse
monoclonal antibody (1:50, Sigma),
anti-BrdU (1:400, Sigma), anti cas-
pase-3 goat polyclonal (1:100, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA),
anti NeuroD (1:100, Santa Cruz), and
anti Hu C/D (1:50, Molecular Probes,
Eugene, OR). Briefly, sections were
rehydrated and given several washes
in Phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
with 0.1% Tween-20 or Triton X 100
(PBST). The sections were first incu-
bated with blocking solution for 1 hr
(5% goat/rabbit/donkey serum, 1%
BSA in PBS) and then with primary
antibody for either 1 hr at room tem-
perature or overnight at 4C. Antigen
retrieval was done wherever appro-
priate by keeping the slides in 80C
water bath for 15 min either in so-
dium-citrate buffer (pH 6.0) or Tris
buffer (pH 8.0) before incubation with
the primary antibody.
The following secondary antibodies
were used: Rhodamine-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit antibody (1:100, Santa
Cruz), rhodamine-conjugated donkey
anti-goat antibody (1:100, Santa Cruz),
rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG antibody (1:100, Jackson Immuno-
Research Laboratories, West Grove,
PA), and FITC-conjugated goat anti-
mouse (1:50, Santa Cruz). Nuclei were
counter-stained either with bisbenzi-
mide H 33258 fluorochrome (Hoechst
nuclear stain) or with DAPI (1: 500,
Sigma).
BrdU immunohistochemistry on
uninjured and injured spinal cord was
done according to Mueller and Wulli-
mann (2002). Paraformaldehyde-fixed
paraffin sections were washed in PBST
twice for 10 min, followed by incuba-
tion in 2N HCl (pH 2.0) for 30 min at
37C. Sections were washed in PBS
and blocked with 5% normal goat se-
rum in 0.5% PBST for 1 hr at room
temperature. The mouse monoclonal
anti-BrdU primary antibody (1:400,
Sigma) was applied for 2 hr at room
temperature or overnight at 4C. This
was followed by washes in PBS and
incubated with secondary anti-mouse
FITC/TRITC conjugated antibody for 2
hr at room temperature. After washing
in PBS, the sections were mounted
with Aqua Vectashield (Vector Labs,
Burlingame, CA) and kept in the dark.
TdT-Mediated Deoxy-UTP-
Nick End Labeling (TUNEL)
Assay
TUNEL staining was performed to
detect apoptotic cells using the ‘‘In
Situ Cell Death Detection Kit, Fluo-
rescein’’ (Roche Molecular Biochemi-
cals, Mannheim, Germany). In brief,
deparaffinized sections were perme-
abilized in PBS containing 0.02% Tri-
ton X-100 for 10 min. After washing
in PBS for 10 min, tissue sections
were incubated with TUNEL reaction
mixture for 2 hr at 37C. After several
washings in PBS, sections were
mounted by vectashield and exam-
ined under confocal microscope. The
morphological changes of nuclei were
also examined to clear the visualiza-
tion of apoptotic bodies.
Microscopy
The light microscopic photographs
were taken by using a Leica DMLB
microscope. Immunostained tissue
sections were photographed by using
an Olympus fluorescent microscope
(model; BX 51) with Imagepro express
software and confocal images were
obtained by using a Zeiss LSM 510
Meta (inverted) confocal microscope.
Figures were assembled and edited
with Adobe Photoshop CS and Image
Ready software packages.
ELISA
Analysis of Caspase-3 protein by using
ELISA assay was done according to
Dutta et al. (2009). Tissue extract of
spinal cord were added to wells (65 mg
protein/well) of the ELISA plate and
incubated overnight at 4C. After non-
specific sites were blocked with block-
ing buffer (1% BSA in PBS), the wells
were incubated with primary antibody
(anti-Caspase-3) for 1 hr at 37C, and
washed thrice in washing buffer (0.5%
BSA, 0.5% NP-40 in PBS). HRP
coupled anti-goat antibody (1:1,000
dilution) was used for incubating the
plates at 37C for 1 hr, then washed
several times in washing buffer and
substrate TMB (tetramethyl benze-
dine) was added in dark. The reaction
was stopped by adding 1M H2SO4. The
optical density was measured at 450
nm by using an ELISA reader (Bio
Rad, Gaithersburg, MD).
Measurement of Functional
Locomotor Activity
Motor function activity has been stud-
ied both in uninjured and injured
fishes by monitoring the swimming
behavior and pattern of individual fish.
Both the distance covered and direc-
tional changes were recorded by plac-
ing the fish in a container with a uni-
form grid length (about 9 cm) and a
constant water level, temperature, and
light source were maintained during
all the experiments. Fishes of same
size (approximately 3 cm) and age
were used for all experiments. The
functional behavior of the fishes at dif-
ferent time points (3dpi, 7dpi, 10dpi,
15dpi, and 1 month post-injury) were
recorded several times a day for 3 min
in each run. Initially, before giving spi-
nal cord injury, the swimming activity
and traveled distance for all the unin-
jured fishes were measured. The bar
graph was constructed using the mean
value of swimming distance covered in
each time point and the variability of
values is given as SEM.
Quantification and Statistical
Analysis
For BrdU incorporation experiment,
BrdUþ cells were counted in longitudi-
nal spinal cord section by using an
Olympus fluorescent microscope
(model; BX 51). During quantification,
BrdUþ cells in both grey and white
matter region were counted; slow- and
fast-dividing cells were differentiated
according to their staining intensities.
In GFAP and BrdU colocalization
study, the quantification of cells was
done from all optical images by using a
Zeiss LSM 510 Meta (inverted)
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2977
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
confocal microscope. We have used
approximately 4-mm length of tissues
both from uninjured and injured
cords, sectioned the whole cord, and
all the sections were stained with
GFAP (to count GFAPþ cells repre-
senting radial glial morphology, the
soma of the radial glia was positioned
towards ependymal canal) and DAPI
(to count nucleus) along with BrdU
staining. The statistical analyses were
performed with Microsoft Excel (Office
2000) and variability of values is given
as SEM. Statistical significance was
determined using an unpaired Stu-
dent’s t-test and Mann-Whitney U-
test. Results were considered statisti-
cally significant at P < 0.05 for both
tests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. T. K. Nag, AIIMS, for his
excellent technical assistance and
guidance to generate Electron micros-
copy data. This work was supported by
the Department of Biotechnology, Min-
istry of Science and Technology, Govt.
of India, to Sukla Ghosh. S. P. Hui is a
recipient of a senior research fellow-
ship from the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, Govt. of India.
REFERENCES
Alonso G. 2005. NG2 proteoglycan-
expressing cells of the adult rat brain:
possible involvement in the formation
of glial scar astrocytes following stab
wound. Glia 49:318–338.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM,
Mateo AS, Merchant-Larios H. 1998.
Primary neural precursors and intermi-
totic nuclear migration in the ventricu-
lar zone of adult canaries. J Neurosci
18:1020–1037.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Seri B, Doetsch F.
2002. Identification of neural stem cells
in the adult vertebrate brain. Brain Res
Bull 57:751–758.
Anderson MJ, Waxman SG. 1983. Caudal
spinal cord of the teleost Sternarchus
albifrons resembles regenerating cord.
Anat Rec 205:85–92.
Appel B, Chitnis A. 2002. Neurogenesis
and Specification of Neuronal Identity.
In: Solnica-Krezel L, editor. Pattern for-
mation in zebrafish, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag. p 237–251.
Balentine JD. 1978a. Pathology of experi-
mental spinal cord trauma. I. The ne-
crotic lesion as a function of vascular
injury. Lab Invest 39:236–253.
Balentine JD. 1978b. Pathology of experi-
mental spinal cord trauma. II. Ultra-
structure of axons and myelin. Lab
Invest 39:254–266.
Beattie MS, Farooqui AA, Bresnahan JC.
2000. Review of current evidence for ap-
optosis after spinal cord injury. J Neu-
rotrauma 17:915–925.
Becker T, Wullimann MF, Becker CG,
Bernhardt RR, Schachner M. 1997.
Axonal regrowth after spinal cord
transection in adult zebrafish. J Comp
Neurol 377:577–595.
Becker T, Lieberoth BC, Becker CG,
Schachner M. 2005. Differences in the
regenerative response of neuronal cell
populations and indications for plastic-
ity in intraspinal neurons after spinal
cord transection in adult zebrafish. Mol
Cell Neurosci 30:265–278.
Bernhardt RR. 1999. Cellular and molecu-
lar bases of axonal regeneration in the
fish central nervous system. Exp Neurol
157:223–240.
Bethea JR. 2000. Spinal cord injury-
induced inflammation: a dual-edged
sword. Prog Brain Res 128:33–42.
Blight AR. 1985. Delayed demyelination and
macrophage invasion: a candidate for sec-
ondary cell damage in spinal cord injury.
CentNerv Syst Trauma 2:299–315.
Butler EG, Ward MB. 1967. Reconstitu-
tion of the spinal cord after ablation in
adult Triturus. Dev Biol 15:464–486.
Cameron RS, Rakic P. 1991. Glial cell lin-
eage in the cerebral cortex: a review
and synthesis. Glia 4:124–137.
Campbell K, Gotz M. 2002. Radial glia:
multi-purpose cells for vertebrate brain
development. Trends Neurosci 25:
235–238.
Chernoff EA. 1996. Spinal cord regenera-
tion: a phenomenon unique to urodeles?
Int J Dev Biol 40:823–831.
Chernoff EA, Stocum DL, Nye HL,
Cameron JA. 2003. Urodele spinal cord
regeneration and related processes. Dev
Dyn 226:295–307.
Citron BA, Arnold PM, Sebastian C, Qin
F, Malladi S, Ameenuddin S, Landis
ME, Festoff BW. 2000. Rapid upregula-
tion of caspase-3 in rat spinal cord after
injury: mRNA, protein, and cellular
localization correlates with apoptotic
cell death. Exp Neurol 166:213–226.
Crowe MJ, Shuman SL, Masters JN,
Bresnahan JC, Beattie MS. 1995. Mor-
phological evidence suggesting apopto-
tic nuclei in spinal cord injury. Soc
Neurosci Abstr 21:232.
David E, Winkelmann E, Marx I, David
H. 1973. Ultrastructural changes of
neurons and synapses in the neocortex,
striatum, and thalamus induced by oxy-
gen deficiency in the guinea pig (Cavia
porcellus L.). J Hirnforsch 14:375–388.
Donnelly DJ, Popovich PG. 2008. Inflam-
mation and its role in neuroprotection,
axonal regeneration and functional re-
covery after spinal cord injury. Exp
Neurol 209:378–388.
Dutta A, Sen T, Banerji A, Das S, Chat-
terjee A. 2009. Studies on multifunc-
tional effect of all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) on matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2) and its regulatory molecules
in human breast cancer cells (MCF-7).
J Oncol 2009:627840.
Echeverri K, Tanaka EM. 2002. Ectoderm
to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298:
1993–1996.
Egar M, Singer M. 1972. The role of epen-
dyma in spinal cord regeneration in the
urodele, Triturus. Exp Neurol 37:422–430.
Ferretti P, Ghosh S. 1997. Expression of
regeneration-associated cytoskeletal
proteins reveals differences and similar-
ities between regenerating organs. Dev
Dyn 210:288–304.
Ferretti P, Zhang F, O’Neill P. 2003.
Changes in spinal cord regenerative
ability through phylogenesis and devel-
opment: lessons to be learnt. Dev Dyn
226:245–256.
Fine ML. 1989. Embryonic, larval and
adult development of the sonic neuro-
muscular system in the oyster toadfish.
Brain Behav Evol 34:13–24.
Fitch MT, Doller C, Combs CK, Landreth
GE, Silver J. 1999. Cellular and molec-
ular mechanisms of glial scarring and
progressive cavitation: in vivo and in
vitro analysis of inflammation-induced
secondary injury after CNS trauma. J
Neurosci 19:8182–8198.
Fox GQ, Richardson GP. 1982. The devel-
opmental morphology of Torpedo mar-
morata: electric lobe-electromotoneuron
proliferation and cell death. J Comp
Neurol 207:183–190.
Gage FH. 2000. Mammalian neural stem
cells. Science 287:1433–1438.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Ferron S, Flames N,
Collado L, Desfilis E, Font E. 2002. The
proliferative ventricular zone in adult
vertebrates: a comparative study using
reptiles, birds, and mammals. Brain
Res Bull 57:765–775.
Guth L, Zhang Z, Steward O. 1999. The
unique histopathological responses of
the injured spinal cord. Implications for
neuroprotective therapy. Ann NY Acad
Sci 890:366–384.
Hampton DW, Rhodes KE, Zhao C,
Franklin RJ, Fawcett JW. 2004. The
responses of oligodendrocyte precursor
cells, astrocytes and microglia to a cort-
ical stab injury, in the brain. Neuro-
science 127:813–820.
Hartfuss E, Galli R, Heins N, Gotz M.
2001. Characterization of CNS precur-
sor subtypes and radial glia. Dev Biol
229:15–30.
Holder N, Clarke JD, Kamalati T, Lane
EB. 1990. Heterogeneity in spinal ra-
dial glia demonstrated by intermediate
filament expression and HRP labelling.
J Neurocytol 19:915–928.
Humason GL. 1979. Animal tissue techni-
ques. New York: WH Freeman & Co.
Kalman M. 2002. GFAP expression with-
draws: a trend of glial evolution? Brain
Res Bull 57:509–511.
Kaslin J, Ganz J, Brand M. 2008. Prolif-
eration, neurogenesis and regeneration
in the non-mammalian vertebrate
brain. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
363:101–122.
Kigerl KA, Gensel JC, Ankeny DP,
Alexander JK, Donnelly DJ, Popovich
PG. 2009. Identification of two distinct
2978 HUI ET AL.
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
macrophage subsets with divergent
effects causing either neurotoxicity or
regeneration in the injured mouse spi-
nal cord. J Neurosci 29:13435–13444.
Kim CH, Ueshima E, Muraoka O, Tanaka
H, Yeo SY, Huh TL, Miki N. 1996.
Zebrafish elav/HuC homologue as a
very early neuronal marker. Neurosci
Lett 216:109–112.
Korzh V, Sleptsova I, Liao J, He J, Gong
Z. 1998. Expression of zebrafish bHLH
genes ngn1 and nrd defines distinct
stages of neural differentiation. Dev
Dyn 213:92–104.
Leonard RB, Coggeshall RE, Willis WD.
1978. A documentation of an age related
increase in neuronal and axonal num-
bers in the stingray, Dasyatis sabina,
Leseuer. J Comp Neurol 179:13–21.
Li GL, Farooque M, Holtz A, Olsson Y.
1999. Apoptosis of oligodendrocytes
occurs for long distances away from the
primary injury after compression
trauma to rat spinal cord. Acta Neuro-
pathol 98:473–480.
Liu XZ, Xu XM, Hu R, Du C, Zhang SX,
McDonald JW, Dong HX, Wu YJ, Fan
GS, Jacquin MF, Hsu CY, Choi DW.
1997. Neuronal and glial apoptosis after
traumatic spinal cord injury. J Neurosci
17:5395–5406.
Malatesta P, Hartfuss E, Gotz M. 2000.
Isolation of radial glial cells by fluores-
cent-activated cell sorting reveals a
neuronal lineage. Development 127:
5253–5263.
McEwenML, Springer JE. 2005. A mapping
study of caspase-3 activation following
acute spinal cord contusion in rats. J His-
tochemCytochem53:809–819.
Miyata T, Kawaguchi A, Okano H, Ogawa
M. 2001. Asymmetric inheritance of ra-
dial glial fibers by cortical neurons.
Neuron 31:727–741.
Monaghan JR, Walker JA, Page RB,
Putta S, Beachy CK, Voss SR. 2007.
Early gene expression during natural
spinal cord regeneration in the sala-
mander Ambystoma mexicanum. J Neu-
rochem 101:27–40.
Morshead CM, Reynolds BA, Craig CG,
McBurney MW, Staines WA, Morassutti
D, Weiss S, van der Kooy D. 1994. Neu-
ral stem cells in the adult mammalian
forebrain: a relatively quiescent subpo-
pulation of subependymal cells. Neuron
13:1071–1082.
Mueller T, Wullimann MF. 2002. BrdU-,
neuroD (nrd)- and Hu-studies reveal
unusual non-ventricular neurogenesis
in the postembryonic zebrafish fore-
brain. Mech Dev 117:123–135.
Naganska E, Matyja E. 2001. Ultrastruc-
tural characteristics of necrotic and ap-
optotic mode of neuronal cell death in a
model of anoxia in vitro. Folia Neuropa-
thol 39:129–139.
Newcomb JK, Zhao X, Pike BR, Hayes RL.
1999. Temporal profile of apoptotic-like
changes in neurons and astrocytes follow-
ing controlled cortical impact injury in the
rat. ExpNeurol 158:76–88.
Nona SN, Stafford CA, Duncan A, Cronly-
Dillon JR, Scholes J. 1994. Myelin
repair by Schwann cells in the regener-
ating goldfish visual pathway: regional
patterns revealed by X-irradiation. J
Neurocytol 23:400–409.
Nona SN, Thomlinson AM, Bartlett CA,
Scholes J. 2000. Schwann cells in the
regenerating fish optic nerve: evidence
that CNS axons, not the glia, determine
when myelin formation begins. J Neu-
rocytol 29:285–300.
Nordlander RH, Singer M. 1978. The role
of ependyma in regeneration of the spi-
nal cord in the urodele amphibian tail.
J Comp Neurol 180:349–374.
O’Hara CM, Egar MW, Chernoff EA.
1992. Reorganization of the ependyma
during axolotl spinal cord regeneration:
changes in intermediate filament and fi-
bronectin expression. Dev Dyn 193:
103–115.
Park HC, Hong SK, Kim HS, Kim SH,
Yoon EJ, Kim CH, Miki N, Huh TL.
2000. Structural comparison of zebra-
fish Elav/Hu and their differential
expressions during neurogenesis. Neu-
rosci Lett 279:81–84.
Pinto L, Gotz M. 2007. Radial glial cell
heterogeneity: the source of diverse
progeny in the CNS. Prog Neurobiol 83:
2–23.
Popovich PG, Wei P, Stokes BT. 1997. Cel-
lular inflammatory response after spinal
cord injury in Sprague-Dawley and
Lewis rats. J Comp Neurol 377:443–464.
Reimer MM, Sorensen I, Kuscha V, Frank
RE, Liu C, Becker CG, Becker T. 2008.
Motor neuron regeneration in adult
zebrafish. J Neurosci 28:8510–8516.
Reimer MM, Kuscha V, Wyatt C, Soren-
sen I, Frank RE, Knuwer M, Becker T,
Becker CG. 2009. Sonic hedgehog is a
polarized signal for motor neuron
regeneration in adult zebrafish. J Neu-
rosci 29:15073–15082.
Renault-Mihara F, Okada S, Shibata S,
Nakamura M, Toyama Y, Okano H.
2008. Spinal cord injury: emerging ben-
eficial role of reactive astrocytes’ migra-
tion. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 40:
1649–1653.
Shechter R, London A, Varol C, Raposo C,
Cusimano M, Yovel G, Rolls A, Mack
M, Pluchino S, Martino G, Jung S,
Schwartz M. 2009. Infiltrating blood-
derived macrophages are vital cells
playing an anti-inflammatory role in re-
covery from spinal cord injury in mice.
PLOS Med 6:1–17.
Shuman SL, Bresnahan JC, Beattie MS.
1996. Morphological evidence of glial
involvement in apoptotic cell death fol-
lowing spinal cord contusion. Soc Neu-
rosci Abstr 22:1185.
Singer M, Nordlander RH, Egar M. 1979.
Axonal guidance during embryogenesis
and regeneration in the spinal cord of
the newt: the blueprint hypothesis of
neuronal pathway patterning. J Comp
Neurol 185:1–21.
Song HJ, Stevens CF, Gage FH. 2002.
Neural stem cells from adult hippocam-
pus develop essential properties of func-
tional CNS neurons. Nat Neurosci 5:
438–445.
Soutschek J, Zupanc GK. 1996. Apoptosis
in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish,
Apteronotus leptorhynchus. Brain Res
Dev Brain Res 97:279–286.
Stensaas LJ. 1983. Regeneration in the
spinal cord of the newt Notophthalmus
(Triturus) pyrrhogaster. In: Kao CC,
Bunge RP, Reier PJ, editors. Spinal
cord reconstruction. New York: Raven
Press. p121–149.
Takagi T, Takayasu M, Mizuno M, Yoshi-
moto M, Yoshida J. 2003. Caspase acti-
vation in neuronal and glial apoptosis
following spinal cord injury in mice.
Neurol Med Chir 43:20–9.
Waxman SG, Anderson MJ. 1985. Genera-
tion of electromotor neurons in Ster-
narchus albifrons: differences between
normally growing and regenerating spi-
nal cord. Dev Biol 112:338–344.
Wilson SW, Brand M, Eisen JS. 2002.
Patterning the zebrafish central nerv-
ous system. Results Prob Cell Differ 40:
181–215.
Yoshino J, Tochinai S. 2004. Successful
reconstitution of the non regenerating
adult telencephalon by cell transplanta-
tion in Xenopus leavis. Dev Growth Dif-
ferentiation 46:523–534.
Zhang F, Clarke JD, Ferretti P. 2000.
FGF-2 Up-regulation and proliferation
of neural progenitors in the regenerat-
ing amphibian spinal cord in vivo. Dev
Biol 225:381–391.
Zhang F, Ferretti P, Clarke JD. 2003.
Recruitment of postmitotic neurons into
the regenerating spinal cord of uro-
deles. Dev Dyn 226:341–348.
Zupanc GK. 1999. Neurogenesis, cell
death and regeneration in the adult
gymnotiform brain. J Exp Biol 202:
1435–1446.
Zupanc GK. 2001. Adult neurogenesis
and neuronal regeneration in the cen-
tral nervous system of teleost fish.
Brain Behav Evol 58:250–275.
Zupanc GK, Clint SC. 2003. Potential role
of radial glia in adult neurogenesis of
teleost fish. Glia 43:77–86.
Zupanc GK, Horschke I. 1995. Prolifera-
tion zones in the brain of adult gymno-
tiform fish: a quantitative mapping
study. J Comp Neurol 353:213–233.
Zupanc GK, Zupanc MM. 2006. New neu-
rons for the injured brain: mechanisms
of neuronal regeneration in adult tele-
ost fish. Regen Med 1:207–216.
Zupanc GK, Kompass KS, Horschke I, Ott
R, Schwarz H. 1998. Apoptosis after
injuries in the cerebellum of adult tele-
ost fish. Exp Neurol 152:221–230.
Zupanc GK, Clint SC, Takimoto N,
Hughes AT, Wellbrock UM, Meissner D.
2003. Spatio-temporal distribution of
microglia/macrophages during regener-
ation in the cerebellum of adult teleost
fish, Apteronotus leptorhynchus: a
quantitative analysis. Brain Behav Evol
62:31–42.
Zupanc GK, Hinsch K, Gage FH. 2005.
Proliferation, migration, neuronal dif-
ferentiation, and long-term survival of
new cells in the adult zebrafish brain. J
Comp Neurol 488:290–319.
INJURY RESPONSE IN ZEBRAFISH SPINAL CORD 2979
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l D
yn
am
ic
s
