ORIGINAL A
Hy
ord
il,e
afe
nt of
Train
ted September 30, 2010 (ARCMED-D-10-00330).
Key Words: Hyperbaric oxygen, Hypothermia, Lipid peroxidation, Anti-oxidant enzymes, Spinal
tions, many treatment regimens such as receptor blockers,
physiological antagonists, inhibitors of biosynthetic path-
ways and membrane-stabilizing drugs have come into use
Address reprint requests to: Berker Cemil, Department of Neurosur-
gery, Fatih University Faculty of Medicine, 06510, Ankara, Turkey; Phone:
þ90 312 503 5131; E-mail: berker5@yahoo.com
Archives of Medical Researccord injury.
Introduction
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) includes primary and
secondary injury mechanisms (1). The mechanical effects
of the trauma are the primary cause of damage to the spinal
cord (2). Primary injury is immediate and irreversible and
results in direct damage to neuronal and vascular tissues.
Secondary injury, due to disruption of cell membranes
and alterations in both spinal cord blood flow and metabo-
lism, exacerbates the effects of initial mechanical trauma
(1e4). The majority of experimental studies were designed
to clarify the underlying physiopathological mechanism of
secondary injury (5). Spinal cord microvascular potency
and blood flow decrease (causing ischemia) just after severe
contusion or compression injury (1,2). Many experimental
studies suggested that formation of oxygen radicals and cell
membrane lipid peroxidation play important roles in patho-
genesis of secondary damage (5e8).
In accordance with the recent advances in SCI investiga-0188-4409/$ - see fro
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmBackground and Aims. We undertook this study to investigate the possible beneficial
effects of combined hypothermia and hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) treatment in comparison
with methylprednisolone in experimental spinal cord injury (SCI).
Methods. Forty eight male Wistar albino rats (200e250 g) were randomized into six
groups; A (normothermic control group; only laminectomy), B (normothermic trauma
group; laminectomy þ spinal trauma), C (normothermic methylprednisolone group; lam-
inectomy þ spinal trauma þ methylprednisolone treated), D (hypothermia group; lami-
nectomy þ spinal trauma þ hypothermia treated); E (HBO group; laminectomy þ
spinal trauma þ HBO therapy), F (hypothermia and HBO group; laminectomy þ spinal
trauma þ hypothermia and HBO treated) each containing eight rats. Neurological assess-
ments were performed 24 h after trauma and spinal cord tissue samples had been harvested
for both biochemical and histopathological evaluation.
Results. After SCI, tissue malondialdehyde (MDA) level of the control group was
measured increased, and superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px),
and catalase (CAT) enzyme activities were measured decreased. In group F, it was also
shown that MDA level elevation had been prevented, and group F has increased the
antioxidant enzyme activities than the other experimental groups C, D, E ( p !0.05).
Conclusions. We concluded that the use of combined hypothermia and HBO treatment
might have potential benefits in spinal cord tissue on secondary damage.  2010 IMSS.
Published by Elsevier Inc.Received for publication June 27, 2010; accepDepartment of Neurosurgery, Fatih University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, TurkeyCombined Hyperbaric Oxygen and
Stress Parameters after Spinal C
Kivanc Topuz,a Ahmet Colak,a Berker Cem
Hakan Simsek,a Osman Ipcioglu,b Z
aDepartment of Neurosurgery, bDepartme
dDepartment of Underwater and Hyperbaric Medicine, Haydarpasa
ent matter. Copyright  2010 IMSS. Published by Elsevier
ed.2010.10.004RTICLE
pothermia Treatment on Oxidative
Injury: An Experimental Study
Murat Kutlay,a Mehmet Nusret Demircan,a
r Kucukodaci,c and Gunalp Uzund
Biochemistry, cDepartment of Pathology,
ing Hospital, Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Istanbul, Turkey
h 41 (2010) 506e512Inc.
over time. Still, there is no effective treatment to remedy
This study was performed using 48 male Wistar albino rats
Istanbul, Turkey) plus xylazine hydrochloride (10 mg/kg;
507Hyperbaric Oxygen and Hypothermia after Spinal Cord Injuryweighing 200e250 g. Animal protocols were approved by
the Ethics Committee for Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals of Marmara University. Rats were housed in indi-
vidual cages in the animal laboratory 1 month prior to the
initiation of the experiment. They were allowed free access
to food and water ad libitum before and after surgery and
were maintained in a 12 h light/dark cycle at room temper-
ature (22  3C). Each rat was tested and normal motor
function was found before surgery.
Rats were randomly divided into six experimental
groups: A (normothermic control group; only laminec-
tomy), B (normothermic trauma group; laminectomy þ
spinal trauma), C (normothermic MP group; laminectomyþ
spinal trauma þ MP treated), D (hypothermia group;
laminectomy þ spinal trauma þ hypothermia treated); E
(HBOgroup; laminectomyþ spinal traumaþHBO therapy),
F (hypothermia and HBO group; laminectomy þ spinal
trauma þ hypothermia treated þ HBO treated), each of
which contained eight rats.
Surgical Technique
All rats were anesthetized with an intramuscular injection of
ketamine hydrochloride (50 mg/kg; Ketalar, Parke-Devis,the detrimental effects of SCI (9). The application of hypo-
thermia by lowering body or spinal cord temperature after
SCI has been used successfully as a neuroprotective adjunct
for spinal cord trauma in rodents (10). The protective
effects of hypothermia are attributed to suppression of the
injury-induced immune response and inflammation (10).
Hypothermia also retards excitotoxicity and inhibits oxida-
tive stress through a reduction in oxygen free radical
production and by promoting an increase in spinal collat-
eral blood flow (10). In experimental models, several
studies present the effect of HBO on SCI (11,12), but the
underlying mechanism is poorly understood. This therapy
results in an increase in tissue oxygen tension and improves
collagen synthesis, angiogenesis, epithelization, and resis-
tance to bacteria in problem wounds (13,14).
Hypothermia and HBO treatments for SCI have been well
described in the literature (2,15). To date, according to our
literature search, no combination therapy of hypothermia
and HBO has been reported. The aim of this study was to
determine the effect of a combination of hypothermia and
HBO therapy and compare with methylprednisolone (MP)
treatment on oxidative status after experimental SCI
by measuring lipid peroxidation (MDA) and antioxidant
enzymes, namely, SOD, GSH-Px, CAT, and MDA.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Study GroupsRompun,Bayer, Istanbul, Turkey). Ratswere positioned prone
on the operating table. During surgery, except for the animals
treated with hypothermia, the rats were kept in a heating fan
connected to a box to maintain body temperature at 37C as
measured by rectal probe. A midline dorsal incision using
sterile techniquewas performed. T8-L2 laminaewere exposed
by dissection of paravertebralmuscles. Laminectomywas per-
formed at T9-L1 levels. SCIs as described by Rivlin and Tator
(16) were accomplished by extradural compression of the
exposed spinal cords at T10-12 level for 60 sec using an aneu-
rysmclip (Yasargil FE760, force of closure 70g) in every case.
The following paravertebral fascia and skin were sutured.
Treatments and Study Design
In group A, laminectomy was performed but clip was not
applied. In group B, nomedication was given after clip appli-
cation. In group C, all rats received an IP injection of MP (30
mg/kg; Prednol-L, Mustafa-Nevzat, Istanbul, Turkey) after
clip application. In group D, the injured spinal cord segments
were treated with hypothermia for 120min after clip applica-
tion. The animals reached the target temperature 27e29C
within 30 min following hypothermic treatment application.
In group E, a steel animal hyperbaric oxygen chamber was
flushed with 100% oxygen at the beginning. The chamber
pressure was increased to 2.4 atmospheres absolute (ATA) in
10 min and decompression to normobaric air at the end of
the session gradually in 5 min. HBO session was set as 90
min andwas administered following clip application. In group
F, hypothermia treatment was applied in the hyperbaric
oxygen chamber for 90min. Hyperbaric treatment was started
after the animals reached the target temperature 27e29C
within 30 min following hypothermic treatment application.
Control of Rat Body Temperature
To control and maintain the systemic temperature of the
rats, a heating fan connected to a box (60 x 30 x 30 cm)
in which the animals were placed was used as described
previously (17). The rats’ rectal temperature was continu-
ously monitored with precision thermometer Ellab DM
852. Following SCI, the rats were placed in the box, and
their body temperatures were maintained for 120 min under
hypothermic (27e29C) conditions. Animals reached the
target temperature for hypothermia within 30 min of appli-
cation. After treatment, rats were returned to their cages
and body temperature was allowed to recover naturally.
Neurological Evaluation
Neurological signs after SCI were examined with the
inclined plane test as described by Rivlin and Tator (16).
In the inclined plane test, rats were placed on a flat plat-
form. The angle of the inclined plane is the maximum angle
of the platform at which an animal can support its weight
on an inclined plane measured at 0e90C on which the rat who was blinded to the treatment groups for presence
of hemorrhage, cellular edema, necrosis, and neutrophil
infiltration.
Statistical Analysis
All data were carried out using SPSS program for statistical
calculations (Statistical Package for Social Sciences for
Windows, v.15.0). The parameters were analyzed with
Kruskal-Wallis test to determine differences between groups,
and Mann-Whitney U test was used for dual comparison;
p value!0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Neurological Findings
The control group showed statistically significant results
compared to the other groups. When all treatment groups
(groups CeF) had been compared, statistically difference
was not found among these groups ( p O0.05). However,
group F showed better results than the other treatment
groups. The results of neurological findings are summa-
508 Topuz et al./ Archives of Medical Research 41 (2010) 506e512could keep itself in position at least for 5 min.
Sample Collection
Twenty four hours after clip application the rats were anes-
thetized again and then were sacrificed. Spinal cord
segments were excised for a length of 5 mm rostrally and
caudally to the injury site. All removed samples were thor-
oughly cleaned of blood with a scalpel and each sample was
allocated in two parts. Rostral part was immediately frozen
and stored at 20C for biochemical analyses and the
caudal part was fixed and stored at 4C for histopatholog-
ical evaluation.
Biochemical Analysis
All removed traumatized tissue samples were homogenized
(for 2 min at 16,000 rpm) in 1 mL phosphate-buffered
saline using a homogenizer (T25 Janke & Kunkel GMBH,
IKA-Labortechnik, Staufen, Germany) after cutting the
samples into small pieces. The supernatant solution was
collected and analyzed for enzyme activity and protein
concentration. Protein assays in the samples were measured
in the homogenate according to the method of Lowry et al.
(18). All procedures were carried out at þ4C.
Quantitative measurement of lipid peroxidation as MDA
was performed using a Malondialdehyde Assay Kit (NWK-
MDA01, Northwest Life Science Specialties LLC, Vancou-
ver, WA). Results were expressed as micromoles of MDA
per gram tissue (mmol/g protein). The supernatant solution
was evaluated for SOD activity using a Superoxide Dismu-
tase Assay kit (#706002; Cayman Chemicals Inc., Ann
Arbor, MI) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
SOD activity was expressed as units per gram protein (U/g
protein). The CAT assay kit was obtained from Cayman
Chemicals (cat. #707002) and the assays were conducted
according to their instructions for evaluating CAT activity.
Activity was given in micromoles per gram protein
(mmol/g protein). To measure the GSH-Px activity, the
GSH-Px assay kit was used (test kit code no. NWK-
GPX01, Northwest Life Science Specialties LLC) by adapt-
ing the method of Paglia and Valentine (19). Activity was
given in milliunits per gram protein (mU/g protein).
Pathological Assessment
The pathological samples were fixed in 10% neutral buff-
ered formalin and stored at 4C for 1 week. The spinal
cords were embedded in paraffin. Each block was sectioned
coronally at 5 mm and trimmed with Leica microtome
(Leica RM2035, Germany). Sections were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Preparations were evaluated
by a brightfield microscope (Olympus BH-2, Tokyo, Japan)
and were photographed (Sony CCD-IRIS, Sony Inc, Tokyo,
Japan). All sections were evaluated by the same pathologist Figure 1. Box-and-whisker plot showing inclined plane scores of rat groups.rized in Figure 1.
Biochemical Findings
Results of MDA, SOD, CAT, and GSH-Px are summarized
in Figure 2. The highest MDA level was found in group B
when compared with all other groups. In addition, MDA
levels in the spinal cord tissues were found to be signifi-
cantly lower in groups CeF than in group B. However,
MDA levels were not significantly different among groups
B, C, and D ( p O0.05). Groups E and F were not
509Hyperbaric Oxygen and Hypothermia after Spinal Cord Injurystatistically different ( pO0.05) when compared to group A
( p O0.05) (Figure 2A).
SOD levels were lower in group B compared to the other
groups. A statistically significant difference was not found
between SOD levels in group A and group F. Group F re-
vealed significantly increased SOD levels in groups CeE
( p !0.05) (Figure 2B).
CAT levels were not significantly different between
group A and groups DeF ( p O0.05). In addition, a statis-
tical difference was not shown between CAT levels in group
C and group B ( p O0.05). Group F showed significantly
increased CAT levels compared to groups CeE ( p !
0.05) (Figure 2C).
GSH-Px levels were significantly different between
groups B and E ( p !0.05). On the other hand, GSH-Px
levels in groups B and E were significantly different from
group A ( p!0.05). Group F had increased GSH-Px levels
compared to the other treatment groups ( p !0.05)
(Figure 2D).
Figure 2. Box-and-whisker plot showing: (A) MDA activities in the spinal cord
other groups. (B) Group F revealed significantly increased SOD levels in group
showed significantly increased CAT levels compared to groups CeE ( p !0.05)
GSH-Px levels compared to the other treatment groups ( p!0.05). Any outliers ar
by their row number.Briefly; in group B, activities of the antioxidant enzymes
(SOD, CAT, and GSH-Px) were found to be significantly
lower than in the groups A, C, D, E, and F. In groups CeF,
there was a considerable increase in activities of these
enzymes in the spinal cord tissueswhen compared to groupB.
Pathological Findings
Group A demonstrated normal pathological structure
(Figure 3). In group B, animals had hemorrhage, cellular
edema, necrosis, neutrophil infiltration, and total destruc-
tion of cells with pronounced vacuolization (Figure 4). In
groups CeE; the pathological findings were almost similar.
Many animals had an intermediate degree of hemorrhage,
cellular edema, necrosis, cell destruction with hyperchro-
matic nuclei, and adjacent normal structured cells
(Figure 5). In group F sections, evidences of hemorrhage,
cellular edema, and neutrophil infiltration were also found
reduced from the others (Figure 6).
tissues. MDA level was found highest in group B when compared with all
s CeE ( p !0.05). (C) CAT activities in the spinal cord tissues; group F
. (D) GSH-Px activities in the spinal cord tissues. Group F had increased
e marked with a circle and extreme cases with an asterisk. They are marked
Discussion
Traumatic SCIs are primarily caused by mechanical forces.
Secondary injury is considered to be the result of a number Therefore, it is important to prevent lipid peroxidation for
neurological recovery. Neuroprotective effect of high dose
MP on SCI has been well described previously (26). It
suppresses posttraumatic lipid peroxidation and free radical
Figure 3. Spinal cord pathological section in group A [hematoxylin and
eosin, (H&E), x40]. (A color figure can be found in the online version
of this article.)
Figure 5. Spinal cord pathological section in group C; laminectomy þ
spinal trauma þ methylprednisolone treated (H&E x200). (A color figure
can be found in the online version of this article.)
510 Topuz et al./ Archives of Medical Research 41 (2010) 506e512of proposed self-destructive processes. Both acute inflam-
matory response at the site of injury and spinal cord hemor-
rhage with release of Fe and hemoproteins yield the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cytotoxic
edema which, in turn, contribute to lipid peroxidation and
ischemia (20e25). The central nervous system (CNS) is
particularly vulnerable to free-radical oxidation following
hypoxic or traumatic injuries because of their high unsatu-
rated lipid content (21). Although there is no effective
medical or surgical treatment for primary damage, it seems
theoretically possible to uncover the mechanisms of
secondary changes and prevent them from taking place.
Numerous investigators have postulated that free
radical-triggered peroxidative events occur after SCI.Figure 4. Spinal cord pathological section in group B; laminectomy þ
spinal trauma (H&E x100). (A color figure can be found in the online
version of this article.)generation and hydrolysis at the site of injury (1,26). SCI
significantly increased spinal cord tissue malondialdehyde
(MDA) and also decreased superoxide dismutase (SOD),
glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), and catalase (CAT)
enzyme activities compared to control (5). Serarslan et al.
reported that MP treatment decreases tissue MDA levels
and prevents inhibition of the enzymes SOD and GSH-Px
in tissues (1). In the present study, in group B increased
levels of MDA and decreased levels of SOD, GSH-Px,Figure 6. Spinal cord pathological section in group F; laminectomy þ
spinal trauma þ hypothermia and HBO treated (H&E x200). Less degen-
erative changes and slight shrinking in cytoplasm and nucleus are seen in
neuronal cells. (A color figure can be found in the online version of this
article.)
and CAT were found. Our results are compatible with the tions have been reported to decrease edema formation by
4. G€org€ul€u A, Kiriş T, Unal F, et al. Superoxide dismutase activity and
the effects of NBQX and CPP on lipid peroxidation in experimental
511Hyperbaric Oxygen and Hypothermia after Spinal Cord Injuryprevious reports. In addition, increased levels of SOD,
GSH-Px, and CAT and decreased levels of MDA were also
found in group C. These findings show concordance with
the results of Serarslan et al. (1).
HBO is a very interesting therapeutic modality, which is
known to reduce oxidative stress itself when used in patho-
logical conditions (27,28). HBO therapy has been shown, in
experimental models, to ameliorate the hypoxic state
induced by edema and circulatory compromise after SCI
(11,29,30). In addition, HBO treatment is neuroprotective
in cerebral ischemia and brain trauma (31e34). HBO
decreases edema and promotes capillary angiogenesis
(13,35). The biological effect of hyperbaric oxygen is
derived from hypersaturating circulating plasma with dis-
solved oxygen during and shortly after treatment, resulting
in a transiently increased diffusion gradient between the
circulation and surrounding tissues driving transport of
oxygen into the interstitium and tissues (13,35,36). Previ-
ously, Aydinoz et al. reported that the beneficial effect of
HBO on cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity seems to be
partially mediated by a significant reduction in lipid
peroxidation and by an increase in SOD and GSH-Px activ-
ities in the kidneys. In our study, HBO-treated groups
showed that HBO decreased MDA levels and increased
SOD, GSH-Px, and CAT levels. These findings are in
accordance with the results of Aydinoz et al. Our data on
pathological examination indicate that administration of
HBO attenuated traumatic injury. In addition, the results
of neurological behavioral outcome of HBO-treated groups
were consistent.
Hypothermia was found to have a protective effect
which is complex and influenced by several different
biochemical cascades during SCI (2). Hypothermia contrib-
utes to neuroprotection in the early post-injury period by
reducing lipid peroxidation, owing to three distinctive but
chiefly related protective mechanisms (2). These three
protective effects of hypothermia have influence on blood
supply, cell membrane stabilization, and edema formation
(2). Hypothermia reduces the blood supply of traumatized
neuronal tissue due to the general vasoconstriction and
increased blood viscosity (36). The second beneficial effect
of hypothermia is on cell membrane stabilization, which is
critical for cell viability after SCI (14,37). Consistent with
previous studies about hypothermic protection on lipid per-
oxidation (6), we measured decreased MDA levels in group
D and group F. SCI tended to decrease the tissue levels of
GSH-Px, which protects the cell membrane against oxida-
tive damage by regulating the status of proteins in the cell
membrane (1). In our study, levels of GSH-Px tended to be
increased in groups D and F. In the hypothermia groups
(groups D and F), elevated levels of SOD and GSH-Px
suggest that the lipid peroxidation process accelerates with
increased temperature. The third beneficial effect of hypo-
thermia is on edema formation. Hypothermic implementa-spinal cord injury. Res Exp Med (Berl) 2000;199:285e293.
5. Kalayci M, Coskun O, Cagavi F, et al. Neuroprotective effects of eb-
selen on experimental spinal cord injury in rats. Neurochem Res 2005;
30:403e410.
6. T€uzgen S, Kaynar MY, G€uner A, et al. The effect of epidural cooling
on lipid peroxidation after experimental spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord 1998;36:654e657.
7. Braughler JM, Hall ED. Central nervous system trauma and stroke. I.
Biochemical considerations for oxygen radical formation and lipid
peroxidation. Free Radic Biol Med 1989;6:289e301.
8. Fujimoto T, Nakamura T, Ikeda T, et al. Effects of EPC-K1 on lipid per-
oxidation in experimental spinal cord injury. Spine 2000;25:24e29.
9. Topsakal C, Erol FS, Ozveren MF, et al. Effects of methylprednisolone
and dextromethorphan on lipid peroxidation in an experimental model
of spinal cord injury. Neurosurg Rev 2002;25:258e266.
10. Lo TP Jr, Cho KS, Garg MS, et al. Systemic hypothermia improves
histological and functional outcome after cervical spinal cord contu-
sion in rats. J Comp Neurol 2009;514:433e448.
11. Gamache FW Jr, Myers RA, Ducker TB, et al. The clinical application
of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in spinal cord injury: a preliminary
report. Surg Neurol 1981;15:85e87.
12. Nie H, Xiong L, Lao N, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning
induces tolerance against spinal cord ischemia by upregulation of anti-
oxidant enzymes in rabbits. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006;26:
666e674.means of reducing the spinal cord metabolism and
decreasing protein synthesis (38) when hypothermia was
initiated in the earlier post-injury period (39). In the patho-
logical sections of the present study, decreased edema
formation was found in hypothermia groups. Results of
the neurological examination also supported the efficiency
of the hypothermia treatment.
In conclusion, according to our literature search, this is
the first study demonstrating the neuroprotective effect of
treatment with hypothermia and HBO together after exper-
imental SCI. It seems reasonable to conclude that after
acute SCI, combination of hypothermia and HBO protected
the spinal cord from the secondary damages through
reducing the levels of free radicals by preventing lipid per-
oxidation. However, molecular mechanisms of HBO and
hypothermia treatments are not fully understood. Further
studies should be planned, focusing on the ultrastructural
pathology and long-term treatment periods. Moreover,
additional research is also necessary to further evaluate
the potential benefits of these combination therapies in
the management of acute SCI injury in humans.
References
1. Serarslan Y, Y€onden Z, Ozgiray E, et al. Protective effects of tadalafil
on experimental spinal cord injury in rats. J Clin Neurosci 2010;17:
349e352.
2. Duz B, Kaplan M, Bilgic S, et al. Does hypothermic treatment provide
an advantage after spinal cord injury until surgery? An experimental
study. Neurochem Res 2009;34:407e410.
3. Kurt G, Erg€un E, Cemil B, et al. Neuroprotective effects of infliximab
in experimental spinal cord injury. Surg Neurol 2009;71:332e336.
13. Kindwall EP, Gottlieb LJ, Larson DL. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy in
plastic surgery: a review article. Plast Reconstr Surg 1991;88:898e908.
14. Tompach PC, Lew D, Stoll JL. Cell response to hyperbaric oxygen
treatment. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1997;26:82e86.
15. Kahraman S, D€uz B, Kayali H, et al. Effects of methylprednisolone
and hyperbaric oxygen on oxidative status after experimental spinal
cord injury: a comparative study in rats. Neurochem Res 2007;32:
1547e1551.
16. Rivlin AS, Tator CH. Effect of duration of acute spinal cord compres-
sion in a new acute cord injury model in the rat. Surg Neurol 1978;10:
38e43.
17. Westergren H, Farooque M, Olsson Y, et al. Motor function changes in
the rat following severe spinal cord injury. Does treatment with
moderate systemic hypothermia improve functional outcome? Acta
Neurochir (Wien) 2000;142:567e573.
18. Lowry OH, Rosebrough NJ, Randall RJ. Protein measurement with the
Folin phenol reagent. J Biol Chem 1951;193:265e275.
19. Paglia DE, Valentine WN. Studies on the quantitative and qualitative
characterization of erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase. J Lab Clin Med
1967;70:158e169.
20. Carlson SL, Parrish ME, Springer JE, et al. Acute inflammatory
response in spinal cord following impact injury. Exp Neurol 1998;
151:77e88.
21. Bulkley GB. The role of oxygen free radicals in human disease
processes. Surgery 1983;94:407e411.
22. Demopoulos HB, Flamm ES, Seligman ML, et al. Further studies on
free-radical pathology in the major central nervous system disorders:
effect of very high doses of methylprednisolone on the functional
outcome, morphology, and chemistry of experimental spinal cord
26. Cayli SR, Ates O, Karadag N, et al. Neuroprotective effect of etomi-
date on functional recovery in experimental spinal cord injury. Int J
Dev Neurosci 2006;24:233e239.
27. Ozden TA, Uzun H, Bohloli M, et al. The effects of hyperbaric oxygen
treatment on oxidant and antioxidants levels during liver regeneration
in rats. Tohoku J Exp Med 2004;203:253e265.
28. Oter S, Edremitlioglu M, Korkmaz A, et al. Effects of hyperbaric
oxygen treatment on liver functions, oxidative status and histology
in septic rats. Intensive Care Med 2005;31:1262e1268.
29. Ishihara H, Kanamori M, Kawaguchi Y, et al. Prediction of neurologic
outcome in patients with spinal cord injury by using hyperbaric
oxygen therapy. J Orthop Sci 2001;6:385e389.
30. Yeo JD, Lowry C, McKenzie B. Preliminary report on ten patients
with spinal cord injuries treated with hyperbaric oxygen. Med J Aust
1978;2:572e573.
31. Henninger N, K€uppers-Tiedt L, Sicard KM, et al. Neuroprotective
effect of hyperbaric oxygen therapy monitored by MR-imaging after
embolic stroke in rats. Exp Neurol 2006;201:316e323.
32. Rockswold SB, Rockswold GL, Defillo A. Hyperbaric oxygen in trau-
matic brain injury. Neurol Res 2007;29:162e172.
33. Singhal AB. A review of oxygen therapy in ischemic stroke. Neurol
Res 2007;29:173e183.
34. Yin D, Zhang JH. Delayed and multiple hyperbaric oxygen treatments
expand therapeutic window in rat focal cerebral ischemic model. Neu-
rocrit Care 2005;2:206e211.
35. LaVan FB, Hunt TK. Oxygen and wound healing. Clin Plast Surg
1990;17:463e472.
36. Knighton DR, Silver IA, Hunt TK. Regulation of wound-healing
angiogenesis-effect of oxygen gradients and inspired oxygen concen-
512 Topuz et al./ Archives of Medical Research 41 (2010) 506e512impact injury. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1982;60:1415e1424.
23. Cemil B, Topuz K, DemircanMN, et al. Curcumin improves early func-
tional results after experimental spinal cord injury. Acta Neurochir
(Wien) 2010;152:1583e1590. discussion 1590. [Epub ahead of print].
24. Siegal T, Siegal T, Shohami E, et al. Experimental neoplastic spinal
cord compression: effect of ketamine and MK-801 on edema and pros-
taglandins. Neurosurgery 1990;26:963e966.
25. Yashon D, Bingham WG Jr, Faddoul EM, et al. Edema of the spinal
cord following experimental impact trauma. J Neurosurg 1973;38:
693e697.tration. Surgery 1981;90:262e270.
37. Rawe SE, Lee WA, Perot PL. Spinal cord glucose utilization after
experimental spinal cord injury. Neurosurgery 1981;9:40e47.
38. Westergren H, Yu WR, Farooque M, et al. Systemic hypothermia
following spinal cord compression injury in the rat: axonal changes
studied by beta-APP, ubiquitin, and PGP 9.5 immunohistochemistry.
Spinal Cord 1999;37:696e704.
39. Dietrich WD. Nonpharmocological strategies—moderate hypo-
thermia. In: Narayan RK, Wilberger JE, Povlishock JT, eds. Neuro-
trauma. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1996. pp. 1491e1506.
