Transplantation of Nanostructured
Composite Scaffolds Results in the
Regeneration of Chronically Injured
Spinal Cords
Fabrizio Gelain,†,‡,* Silvia Panseri,† Stefania Antonini,†,‡ Carla Cunha,†,‡ Matteo Donega,†,‡ Joseph Lowery,§
Francesca Taraballi,†,‡ Gabriella Cerri, Marcella Montagna, Fausto Baldissera, and Angelo Vescovi‡,§,*
†Biotechnology and Biosciences Department, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan 20126, Italy, ‡Center for Nanomedicine and Tissue Engineering - A.O. Niguarda Ca’
Granda, Milan 20162, Italy, §Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States, Department of
Human Physiology, University of Milan, Milan 20133, Italy, and §IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Opera di San Pio da Pietrelcina, San Giovanni Rotondo 71013, Italy
A
complex cascade of harmful events
underlies the establishment of
chronic spinal cord injury (SCI). The
complexity of this cascade has been de-
scribed in some detail, from the events fol-
lowing the initial contusion1 to those estab-
lishing chronic injuries.2 When developing
treatments for SCI, the complexity of the
task at hand varies with the stage of the le-
sion, peaking in chronic injuries. Key patho-
physiological factors, such as lack of neu-
rotrophic stimulation or permissive
substrates,3 inhibitory environment,4 sec-
ondary inflammatory damage,5 and intrin-
sic growth deficiency in adult neurons,6
have been targeted with a good degree of
success in acute and subacute SCI.3,7 Unfor-
tunately, despite significant progress,
chronic injuries still present us with a com-
plex scenario. Over time, damaged axons
undergo atrophy,8 retrograde degeneration
and retraction,9 while genes required for re-
generation are down regulated.10 This is
compounded by the eventual establish-
ment of a refractory barrier of extracellular
matrix and glial scarring at the injury site.7
Complementary approaches, including cell
therapy,11,12 digestion of glial scarring,7,11
neurotrophic factor delivery,13 and electri-
cal stimulation of the tissue surrounding the
injury site14 as well as clinical rehabilita-
tion,15 are being developed to accomplish
nerve fiber regeneration and functional res-
toration in SCI. Intriguingly, Schwann cell
transplantation can produce partial recov-
ery in subacute contusive lesions,16 and ef-
fective bridging and functional improve-
ments have recently been accomplished in
chronic SCI by combinatorial approaches,
modifying both neuronal-intrinsic and
-extrinsic growth mechanisms17 and ex-
ploiting neural progenitors transplanta-
tion.18
While the scenario is now turning on
the brighter side, the breadth of destruc-
tion of the nervous tissue observed in
chronic SCI in humansOwith entire sec-
tions of the spinal cord being replaced by
fluid-filled cystsOremains a critical concern.
Within these regions, the mechanical sub-
strates that provide physical support for ax-
onal regeneration and three-dimensional
positional information as well as the cytoar-
chitectural organization required for effec-
tive nerve regrowth have gone perma-
nently lost. Hence, a most pressing issue in
chronic SCI is to warrant a suitable level of
*Address correspondence to
fabrizio.gelain@unimib.it,
angelo.vescovi@unimib.it.
Received for review September 20,
2010 and accepted December 13, 2010.
Published online December 28, 2010.
10.1021/nn102461w
© 2011 American Chemical Society
ABSTRACT The destruction and hollowing of entire tissue segments represent an insurmountable barrier to
axonal regeneration and therapeutics in chronic spinal cord injury. To circumvent this problem, we engineered
neural prosthetics, by assembling electrospun nanofibers and self-assembling peptides into composite guidance
channels and transplanted them into the cysts of a postcontusive, chronic spinal cord injury rat model, also
providing delivery of proregenerative cytokines. Six months later conspicuous cord reconstruction was observed.
The cyst was replaced by newly formed tissue comprising neural and stromal cells. Nerve fibers were interspersed
between and inside the guidance channels, spanning the lesion, amidst a well-developed vascular network,
basal lamina, and myelin. This was accompanied by a significant improvement in the activity of ascending and
descending motor pathways and the global locomotion score. Thus by engineering nanostructured matrices into
neuroprosthetics, it is possible to recreate an anatomical, structural, and histological framework, which leads to
the replacement of large, hollow tissue gaps in the chronically injured spinal cord, fostering axonal regeneration
and neurological recovery.
KEYWORDS: self-assembling peptide · spinal cord injury · tissue
engineering · electrospinning · evoked potentials
A
RTIC
LE
www.acsnano.org VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ 227–236 ▪ 2011 227
anatomical, histological, and cellular reconstruction at
the lesion site. Thus, the scar tissue and hollow cysts
should be replaced with new neural tissue, permissive
for both axonal regrowth and lesion bridging. Pioneer-
ing studies on acute injuries show the usefulness of
various artificial or biological materials in acute and sub-
acute SCI.19,20 In particular Teng and colleagues ob-
tained significant functional recovery in poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) (PLGA) scaffolds seeded with neural stem
cells.21 In animal models of complete transection,
Bunge’s group obtained significant axonal regenera-
tion and myelination within implanted resorbable poly-
meric scaffolds seeded with Schwann cells.22 Unfortu-
nately, similar studies on chronicized contusions in the
spinal cord, the most frequent situation in clinics, are
few. Biomatrix bridges, mixed with cells of olfactory ep-
ithelial origin, were explored but failed to sustain
chronically injured cortico-spinal axons.23 Better results
were obtained through the use of longitudinal channels
within poly(-caprolactone) (PCL) foam implants, that
supported axonal regrowth, albeit for a limited time.24
Self-assembling peptides (SAPs) and electrospun
constructs, both characterized by their nanoscale archi-
tecture, are now being used in regenerative
medicine,25,26 including neuroregeneration27,28 and
slow delivery of cytokines.29 Here we tackled the issue
of anatomical and functional reconstruction in chronic
SCI by using SAPs in a combinatorial approach, in which
they were assembled into electrospun microchannel
guidance constructs made of PLGA and PCL blended fi-
bers. The aim was to establish a “neuro-prosthetic”
which would improve directional axonal regeneration
while supplying critical mechanical compliance, bio-
compatibility and degradation, and high porosity and
functionalization with biologically active motifs.30 These
microconduits, alone or imbued with a mix of regenera-
tive cytokines,31,32 were transplanted into the large
cysts that formed in the postcontusive spinal cord one
month after injury. Six months later, we found that,
while cysts persisted in control and sham-operated ani-
mals, they had been replaced by neo-formed tissue in
animals transplanted with microconduits. The latter
contained and was intermingled with bundles of regen-
erating axons and myelin, deposition of extracellular
matrix (ECM) and stromal cells, and well developed neo-
vascular structures, in the absence of considerable in-
flammatory response. This was matched by significant
improvement in motor function on the Basso, Beattie,
and Bresnahan (BBB) scale and in amplitudes and laten-
cies of evoked responses in ascending tracts. Thus,
transplantation of combined electrospun fibers/SAP
scaffolds neuro-prosthetics supports broad anatomical
and histological reconstruction and significant func-
tional recovery in the chronically injured, hollowed spi-
nal cord.
RESULTS
Surgery and Scaffold Implantation.We investigated a
postcontusion, chronic SCI rat model characterized by
centrally located cavities (cysts)33 and surrounded by
gliotic scar tissue, four weeks following a standardized,
weight-drop trauma34 (Figure 1A).
Various biological or synthetic materials have been
proposed in order to develop therapies for the injured
spinal cord,19,20 although most attempts have focused
on acute transection lesions rather than the postcontu-
sion damage most frequent in humans.35 These com-
prise the use of a combination of synthetic guidance
channels, hydrogel fillers, growth factors, and fetal,
schwann, or bone marrow cells in acute SC transection
studies.20,22,36,37
Here, we attempted to reinstate an appropriate
structural and environmental regenerative milieu us-
ing SAP-assembled tridimensional nanostructures (Fig-
ure 1B).
Using electrospinning, we generated hollow chan-
nels of nanofibers, composed of blended PCL and PLGA
at a weight ratio of 5.5/4. The PLGA provides short-
term strength, and the PCL provides long-term stabil-
ity.38 By this, we achieved a long-lasting reabsorption
Figure 1. Injury model and scaffold preparation. (A) hematoxylin-
eosin of a one-month old spinal cord lesion in longitudinal section;
arrows point at the cyst margins containing tissue debris (magnifi-
cation 5X). SEM images of self-assembled RADA16-I-BMHP1 (B)
and of an electropsun, PCL/PLGA microguidance channel (C); a
high-power magnification is shown in the inset. (D) Schematic rep-
resentation of scaffold implantation. Conduits, presoaked in PBS
and filled with RADA16-I-BMHP1 self-assembling peptide via
microsyringe injection (inset), were placed singularly within the
cavity following scar ablation. An electrospun lamina was sutured
and glued to the meninges.
A
RT
IC
LE
VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ GELAIN ET AL. www.acsnano.org228
time in vivo (over 6 months), while preserving fiber
thickness and electrospun frame permeability. The av-
erage fiber diameter was 592  225 nm and the tube
length was between 2 and 3 mm, depending on the
cavities to be filled. The outer tube diameter and wall
thickness were 360 and 90 m, respectively (Figure 1C
and inset). Right before implantation guidance chan-
nels were wetted with phosphate buffer saline solution,
infiltrating tubular walls and wetting their inner lu-
mens due to capillary forces, which allowed for easy
tube removal.
In this context, a key issue is that synthetic poly-
mers, including those we used, lack cell adhesion sites,
providing poor support for neural cells.39 Furthermore,
PCL is hydrophobic, similar to synthetic polymer nano-
fibers, in which the decrease in diameter increases the
effective contact angle, making them unsuitable for
neural cell growth and differentiation. Thus, although
electrospinning can produce submicrometer, polymeric
fibrous scaffolds, further modifications become neces-
sary to establish an environment that will effectively
support neural cell functions. Incorporation of neurite-
promoting ECM proteins tissue in polymeric electro-
spun scaffolds has been proposed to mimic the native
properties of the nervous tissue.40 To do that, we as-
sembled nanostructured SAPs scaffolds30 at 1% (w/v)
concentration within microstructured frames (a blend
of PLGA and PCL), producing a novel kind of neuro-
prosthetics, shaped into longitudinal guidance micro-
channels, filled with functionalized SAP hydrogels,
alone or combined with a mix of neurotrophic cyto-
kines (Figure 1D).31,32 Peptide self-assembly occurred in-
side the cavity of electrospun conduits, previously wet-
ted with phosphate buffer saline solution (pH 7.4), filled
by microsyringe injection (Figure 1D, inset), and was
routinely verified (Figure S1, Supporting Information).
Since it has been proven that matrices foster better
neuronal growth when constructed with a compliance
similar to nervous tissue,41 we accordingly chose a SAP
concentration of 1% (w/v) to yield a hydrogel scaffold
stiffness similar to the spinal cord (unpublished experi-
ments). The guidance effect exerted by the electrospun
conduits was warranted in part by their mechanical
stiffness, measured to be 12 orders of magnitude
greater than SAP hydrogels (mechanical characteriza-
tion tests unpublished).
Four weeks after the trauma, animals were assessed
for BBB motor score and randomly divided in three ex-
perimental groups: sham operated, i.e., rats subjected
to the whole surgical procedure (including meninges
incision and surgical scar debridement) but not receiv-
ing channel implants (group 0); rats implanted with
guidance channels with RADA16-I-BMHP130 (RIB) alone
(group 1); or loaded with brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, ciliary neurotrophic factor, vascular endothelial
growth factor, and chondroithinaseABC (RIB-GF) (group
2). Depending on the geometry of the cyst, 1013
aligned tubes were implanted and oriented along the
longitudinal spinal cord axis (Figure 1D). Spaces among
the channels were filled with the matching RIB or
RIB-GF SAP preparation. Lastly, an electrospun lamina
(of identical chemical composition and similar fiber di-
ameters to the guidance conduits) was sutured to the
dura mater and sealed with fibrin glue.
Histological Findings and Perineural Tissue Regeneration.
Seven months after the lesion (6 months after scar ab-
lation and channel implantation) 5 animals in group 0
(33%), 4 in group 1 (25%), and 7 in group 2 (33%) had
died due to postsurgical complications. At the same
time ependymal canal disruption, dural fibrosis, and in-
traparenchymal cystic cavitation were observed in
sham-operated animals (Figure 2A), compounded by in-
jury to the dorsal corticospinal tract, gracile fasciculi,
and postsynaptic dorsal column pathways.42 Indeed the
SC in sham-operated animals were characterized by
cavities which filled a very large area of the cord sec-
tion. On the contrary, the apparent SC anatomy was
strikingly improved in animals implanted with guid-
ance channels both in groups 1 and 2 (Figure 2B and
C). Cavities were no longer present, and the whole spi-
nal cord section was now made of new tissue, com-
posed of morphologically distinct cells and interspersed
in the interstitial spaces between the degrading guid-
ance channels as well as inside their lumen (Figure 2B
and C). Part of the ventral and lateral roots of the spi-
nal cords was still present in all groups, as expected in
this kind of lesion.33
The nature of the newly formed tissue in groups 1
and 2 was studied by confocal microscopy. Staining
for laminin and collagen IV, two basic components of
basement membranes in nervous tissues, was conspicu-
ous and widespread (Figure 2D and E). Laminin depos-
its (green) surrounded NF200 positive fibers (red) (Fig-
ure 2D), whereas collagen IV (green) was located within
the tissue regenerated throughout the microguidance
channel inner lumen, evincing blood vessel morphol-
ogy. Anti-CD68 immunolabeling revealed physiological
numbers of macrophages inside the tubes lumen and,
more frequently, in the degrading tube walls, consistent
with the ongoing process of bioabsorption of the elec-
trospun frames (Figure 2E). Interestingly, a well-
developed vascular network was observed, both inside
and between the guidance conduits. Blood vessel and
small capillaries were found inside nearly all of the guid-
ance tubes, within their walls and between them (Fig-
ure 2F and G arrows). It is worth noting that distribution
and frequency of the blood vessels were reminiscent
of healthy spinal cord tissue and that the neo-
angiogenesis unfolded preferentially along the longitu-
dinal axes of the spinal cord and guidance tubes (Fig-
ure 2G). Similarly, fibroblasts were detected in the in-
ner lumens and within the fiber meshes of the tubular
walls (Figure 2F in green). Iba-1 positive, microglial cells
were located inside the electrospun tubes at physi-
A
RTIC
LE
www.acsnano.org VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ 227–236 ▪ 2011 229
ologic levels (Figure 2H), also infiltrating the tube walls,
indicating their involvement in the gradual scaffold bio-
degradation. Gliotic astroglial layers were occasionally
found to surround the implants, while GFAP-positive
cells were less frequent between the tubular channels
and inside their lumens (Figure 2I).
Bridging the Spinal Cord Gap and Myelination.We asked if
the observed anatomo-histological reconstruction re-
sulted in axonal regeneration. While the SC of sham-
operated animals showed only cyst cavities at the le-
sion site, quite extensive growth of regenerating
fascicular nerve fibers was detected by anti-GAP43 im-
munolabeling,43 within and among the implanted guid-
ance conduits (Figure 3A). This was confirmed by the
presence of numerous NF200- (group 2) and III-
tubulin-positive fibers (groups 1 and 2), crossing both
the proximal and distal lesion boundaries (Figure 3B
and C). We quantified the percentage of guidance chan-
nels containing positive fibers for GAP43, III-tubulin,
and NF200 throughout the whole conduit length, dis-
counting those in which bridging was incomplete (Fig-
ure 3D). Within group 1 (n  5), i.e., animals implanted
with guidance channels without GFs, 78.00 10.92% of
the channels tested positive for GAP-43, 37.64 
11.99% were III-tubulin-positive, and none contained
fibers positive for NF200 throughout the lesion gap.
Animals receiving both channels and GFs (group 2; n
 8) showed the highest percentage of fibers positive
for all three markers: 100  0% of the channels were
positive for GAP-43; 92.83  4.6% for III-tubulin, and
52.65  15.3% for NF200. Statistical analysis showed a
significant difference for both NF200 and III-tubulin (p
 0.03 and 0.003 respectively; MannWhitney rank
sum test) in favor of animals receiving both channels
and GFs, as compared to channels alone. No significant
difference was found for GAP-43 (p  0.093). As ex-
pected, anti-NF-200 staining did not colocalize with
GAP43 immunofluorescence, although both kinds of fi-
bers were often detected within the same tubes (Figure
3E). Of note, 18.03  3.08% (n  5) and 38.13  5.84%
(n 8) of the fibers positive for III-tubulin were tightly
associated with antimyelin basic protein (MBP) immu-
nolabeling in groups 1 and 2, respectively (Figure 3F
and enlargement in Figure 3G), suggesting that myeli-
nation of regenerating neuronal processes occurs
within the implants. Finally, fibers positive for SMI-32
(Figure 3H)Othe nonphosphorylated isoform of NF
200Owere detected within guidance conduits, to-
Figure 2. Histological and immunofluorescence analysis. Hematoxylin-eosin transverse spinal cord sections are shown, ven-
tral side down, 6 months post-transplant. (A) A large cyst fills the large part of the lesion epicenter in sham-operated animals.
In animals transplanted with guidance channels in groups 1 (B) and 2 (C), the cyst has been replaced by tissue-like ma-
terial. Immunostainings of the inner lumens revealed NF200 positive fibers (red) surrounded by laminin deposits (green)
(D), sporadic CD68 positive cells (red) (E), and abundant collagen IV deposition (in green) around the lumen of putative blood
vessels. Networks of capillaries and vessels, positive for VWF, were detected (red) (F and G) adjacent to fibroblasts, the lat-
ter being located preferentially in the tubewalls (F). Microglial cells were also detected inside the channels and their walls (H).
GFAP positive cells (green) were found mainly outside the implants (I). Dashed lines outline guidance channel walls. Cell nu-
clei (DAPI; blue, DI).
A
RT
IC
LE
VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ GELAIN ET AL. www.acsnano.org230
gether with those stained by SMI-31 (Figure
3I), specific for phosphorylated NF200, all
across the lesion and crossing into the tissue
at both the distal and proximal interfaces.
This shows the presence of both immature
and mature axons and of myelination
throughout the regenerating lesion area. Ax-
onal regrowth, crossing both rostral and cau-
dal implant/tissue interfaces, was aligned
with tubular channel orientation (Figure 3J
dashed lines).
In summary, the newly formed tissue com-
prised both stromal (fibroblasts, endothelium,
and microglia) and neural parenchymal cells
(astrocytes, neurons, and myelinating cells).
Astrocytes were found between and around
the degrading guidance channels together
with neuronal fibers, myelin, microglial cells,
fibroblasts, basement membrane compo-
nents, and endothelial vessels. While the
same cell types were also found inside the
channels, the relative frequency of neurons
and astroglia were quite different.
In turn, the greater majority of the tubes
(75%) contained thick bundles of neuronal
fibers (GAP43 positive cells), cells located
throughout the whole length of the micro-
conduits, running along the longitudinal axis
and crossing the tissue/conduit interfaces at
both rostral and caudal ends. There was a sig-
nificant difference in the composition of the
neuronal fibers found within the guidance
channels filled with SAPs and GFs as com-
pared to those with SAPs alone, since the lat-
ter contained only GAP43- or III-tubulin
positive fibers and in lesser amounts as com-
pared to channels with GFs. The presence of
GFs also led a significant fraction of the neu-
ronal fibers to be labeled with the mature NF-
200 neuronal marker, in good agreement
with the presence of larger amounts of MBP
than observed in channels without GFs (Fig-
ure 3F and G). This leads to infer the transplantation of
guidance channels warrants, per se, not only the preser-
vation of the cord anatomy but also the onset of signifi-
cant axonal regeneration. Second the presence of pro-
regenerative cytokines, which SAPs are known can
release gradually,29 supports the maturation of the neu-
rons and their processes. The continued presence of
both immature and mature neuronal processes inside
the GF-containing channels, as long as six months af-
ter transplantation, shows that nerve regeneration is
still active at this time. This and the fact that guidance
channels are still being readsorbed suggests that the
pro-regenerative effects of these composite neural
prosthetics exceeds the six month end-point tested
here. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first re-
port describing the accomplishment of such a promi-
nent level of anatomical restoration in substitution of
the cysts in chronic SCI.
Functional Recovery: BBB and Electrophysiological Analysis.
The anatomical, histological, and neuronal regenera-
tion observed in transplanted animals was accompa-
nied by functional recovery. We evaluated motor func-
tion by means of serial BBB score analysis. At one week
post-transplantation, the average BBB score was homo-
geneous between all experimental groups (Figure 4).
Notably, significant differences gradually emerged be-
tween group 0 (n 10) and groups 1 and 2 (n 11 and
16, respectively). Animals in group 2, receiving guid-
ance channels plus GFs, showed the best performance,
with significantly improved BBB scores as compared to
Figure 3. Nervous regeneration in the chronically injured rat SC. Dashed lines out-
line channel walls in (AC). In transverse sections (A), GAP-43 positive fibers were
found inside and between transplanted tubes (arrows; coronal section). (B) NF200
positive fibers were seen crossing the top rostral interface of the lesion. (C). III-
tubulin positive fasciculi stretched through the lumen of the conduits in a longitu-
dinal spinal cord section. (D) Quantitative analysis (mean SEM) of the percent-
age of channels showing positivity for neural markers throughout the entire tube
length (N  5 for group 1, N  8 for group 8). Statistical significance: (*) p  0.03;
(**) p 0.003. NF200 (green) and GAP43 (red) did not colocalize inside the same fi-
ber (E). Myelinated (green, arrow) and unmyelinated (red, arrowhead) III-tubulin
positive fibers (F) were observed (enlargement in G). Both SMI-32 (H) and SMI-31 (I)
positive fibers were detected within guidance conduits, in adjacent coronal sec-
tions. In the longitudinal reconstruction of transplanted cord in (J) (group 2), NF200
positive fibers cover the whole length (approx 2 mm) of the lesion, crossing both
the rostral and the caudal channels/tissue interfaces (dotted line).
A
RTIC
LE
www.acsnano.org VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ 227–236 ▪ 2011 231
sham animals (group 0) at 22 and 24 weeks post-
transplant (p  0.005 and p  0.001, respectively (one
way AnovaTukey test). Significant differences be-
tween groups 0 and 1 emerged at 24 weeks (p 0.041).
Electrophysiological investigation was carried out
to evaluate the transmission through ascending and de-
scending pathways also in comparison to healthy ani-
mals. Descending responses evoked by epicortical
stimulation are shown in Figure 5A and B. The muscu-
lar origin44 was confirmed, and their source identified
in the iliopsoas (IL) and quadratus lumborum (QL)
muscles (Figure 5B) (see Methods Section). In all of the
experimental groups (i.e., group 02), amplitude of the
maximum descending responses (Figure 5A) was about
10-fold smaller than in healthy animals. Notably, re-
sponses were larger in both groups receiving guidance
channels, being the highest in group 1 and intermedi-
ate in group 2 as compared to the lowest score in group
0, although statistical significance was detected only
between group 1 and 0 (two-way ANOVA, group main
effect F(2, 19)  7.39, p  0.005; Tukey posthoc analy-
sis p 0.004). Also, ANOVA showed the responses to be
significantly smaller in groups 02 than in healthy ani-
mals (F(3, 24)  73.86, p  0.005, posthoc p  0.0002),
whereas latency of spinal responses did not differ be-
tween the four groups (groups 02 and healthy ani-
mals) (global mean  SD, 3.81 0.53 ms) (Figure 5B).
Analysis of the amplitude of the maximum cortical re-
sponses evoked by epidural dorsal roots stimulation
(Figure 5C,D) revealed both a group (F(2, 20)  4.19, p
 0.04) and a side (left  right, F(1, 20)  23.57, p 
0.0001) main effect, with no interactions, indicating that
the side effect was distributed to all groups indepen-
dently from the presence of the lesion. As for the de-
scending responses, amplitude of the cortical responses
was significantly larger in healthy than in lesioned ani-
mal groups 02 (group main effect F (3, 25) 9.02, p
0.0003; posthoc p  0.0003, p  0.02, p  0.005 for
comparisons with group 02, respectively). Again,
within the lesion groups, the posthoc analysis showed
that difference was significant only between group 1
and 0 (p  0.04). The latency of the first positive (P1)
peak of cortical potentials was significantly longer in le-
sioned animals in all groups 02 than in healthy rats
(group main effect F(3, 25)  91.85, p  0.00001; pos-
thoc, p 0.0002). Notwithstanding, latency was signifi-
cantly longer in group 0 than in animals receiving guid-
ance channels in both group 1 and 2 (group main effect
F(2, 18)  7.58, p  0.005, posthoc p  0.02 and p 
0.009 for group 1 and 2 with respect to group 0) (Fig-
ure 5E and F). The P1N1 time difference (duration of
the ascending response) did not show any significant
change between the 4 groups of animals.
Electrophysiological findings showed a significant
amelioration in the amplitude of muscular responses
likely evoked by activation of brain stem fast descend-
ing pathways, as suggested by the response conduc-
tion velocity, in rats receiving channels alone (Figure 5).
Direct reinnervation of the motor neurons by axons re-
generating through the scaffolds system remains pos-
sible, although unlikely, however more reasonable ex-
planation implies that the observed axonal fiber
regeneration occurred particularly in descending cate-
cholaminergic systems with diffuse innervation,45
known to modulate the excitability of spinal interneu-
rones,46 and motoneurons.47 If so, those axons respon-
Figure 4. BBB scores of the experimental groups. BBB scores
of animals in groups 0 (N  10), 1 (N  11), and 2 (N  16).
At weeks 22 (#) and 24 (##), BBB scores of group 2 differed
significantly from group 0: p 0.005 and p 0.001, respec-
tively, while group 1 reached statistical significance with re-
spect to group 0 at week 24 (*): p  0.041.
Figure 5. Electrophysiology tests. (A) Mean amplitude (SD) of the
maximum spinal responses evoked by epicortical stimulation.
Among lesioned animals, responses are significantly larger in
group 1 than in group 0. (B) Example of a maximum spinal re-
sponse in one healthy (gray line) and in group 1 lesioned rat (black
line). Dotted line shows the EMG response recorded in control ex-
periments in the ILQL muscles. (C) Mean amplitude (SD) of the
maximum cortical responses evoked by cauda equina dorsal roots
epidural stimulation. Among lesioned animals, responses are sig-
nificantly larger in group 1 than in group 0. (D) A maximum corti-
cal response in one healthy (gray line) and one group 1 rat (black
line). (E) Mean latency (SD) of the first positive peak (P1) of corti-
cal responses evoked by dorsal roots stimulation. (F) Example of a
maximum cortical response in one healthy (gray line) and in group
0 (dotted line), group 1 (black line), and group 2 (dashed line) rats.
Arrows mark P1 latency. Statistical significance: (*) p  0.05.
A
RT
IC
LE
VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ GELAIN ET AL. www.acsnano.org232
sible for the fast potential surviving the lesion might
have acted on a progressively increasing number of ex-
citable segmental neurons, thus evoking larger motor
responses as regeneration proceeded. Accordingly, cor-
tical sensory potential was significantly larger in trans-
planted than in sham-operated rats. Here the latency of
cortical potentials was much longer in lesioned than in
healthy rats with significant differences between sham
operated and rats receiving guidance channels, sug-
gesting a possible regeneration of ascending fibers
across the lesion. Although the delayed cortical re-
sponses may be caused by unmasking of ascending
transmission through ventral pathways spared by the
lesion, the conjoint increase in amplitude and conduc-
tion velocity in transplanted animals suggests that
neuro-prosthetics may support regeneration of injured
axonal pathways.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we pursued the repair of the chroni-
cally injured SC37 by attempting to replace the fluid-
filled cyst found in these lesions with a neuro-
prosthetics conducive to tissue reconstruction and ax-
onal regeneration. Electrospun fibers and SAPs, as-
sembled into composite hollow guidance channels,
were transplanted into the cavity of chronic, postcontu-
sive lesions of the thoracic SC, also in combination
with pro-regenerative cytokines. Over a six month pe-
riod, this resulted in significant anatomical reconstruc-
tion, by which the cyst was substituted with new ner-
vous tissue, with axons and neural and stromal cells
found both between the reabsorbing channels and in-
side them. In the large majority of the microconduits,
the regenerating nerve fibers were detected through-
out the whole channels’ length, amidst a well-
developed vascular network, basal lamina compo-
nents, andmyelin. This was matched by a significant im-
provement of both the electrophysiological activity of
ascending and descending motor pathways and the lo-
comotion score in the BBB test.
This work shows that a significant level of anatomi-
cal and functional regeneration can be accomplished
in chronic injuries of the spinal cord by transplantation
of multinanostructured composite scaffolds, under ex-
perimental settings that mimic the kind of lesion mostly
affecting humans. Axonal regeneration is still active six
months after transplant, showing that an even broader
margin of improvement can be accomplished. Further-
more, electrospun fibers can be readily established
from virtually any polymeric material, their diameters
can be tuned at the micro- and nanoscale.48 Thus, com-
bining them in composite frames with SAPs offers the
advantage of pre-establishing high surface area to vol-
ume ratio scaffolds. Given the overall high-density func-
tionalization attainable with different bioactive motifs
and the tunability of diffusive capacities to specific
drugs29 of SAPs, it is now possible to design biomi-
metic scaffolds with the specific mechanical and degra-
dation properties required by neuro-prosthetics for the
use in therapeutic applications.37
For all these reasons we propose this work as a pro-
totypical study, providing the proof of principle that
spatially guided regeneration in the chronically injured
spinal cord can be accomplished by composite nano-
structured scaffolds. Indeed, viewing our settings as a
promising starting point, tomographic imaging of the
cystic cavity and subsequent personalized nanostruc-
tured scaffold design, broader selection of cytokines
that they may be engineered to release over time, pros-
thetic seeding with stem cells, and intensive rehabilita-
tion are some of the increasingly complex and refined
approaches that can be built, which will eventually lead
to the development of effective experimental thera-
pies in humans.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Guidance Channels and Laminae Electrospinning. A 3:1 mixture of
chloroform: methanol by volume was used to create an electro-
spinning solution of 5.5% poly(-caprolactone) (PCL, MW 80 000,
Sigma-Aldrich) and 4% poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA, 75:
25, MW 66 000107 000, Sigma-Aldrich) by weight. The electro-
spinning was performed using a parallel plate apparatus, as de-
scribed previously.48 Spinal cord guidance microtubes were
synthesized by depositing electrospun fibers on grounded 4 cm
33G microneedles with an outer diameter of 210 m (Hamilton)
for 20 s. Fibers were deposited but actually did not adhere to
the microneedles. Needles were rotated during fiber deposition
in order to ensure uniform coating. To create the sealing lamina,
PCL/PLGA nanofibers were deposited on a flat surface for 20
min and then were annealed for 24 h at 55 °C under vacuum to
remove any possible residual solvent. See Supporting Informa-
tion for SEM characterization of channels. End-on images were
used to measure tube diameter and wall thickness.
SAPeptide Synthesis and Purification. The self-assembling peptide
RADA16-I-BMHP1 (Ac-RADARADARADARADAGGPFSSTKT-
CONH2) was F-moc synthesized via a Liberty microwave auto-
mated synthesizer (CEM). Sample masses were verified via a
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer (Applied biosystems), HPLC pu-
rified (Waters), and lyophilized (Labconco). Final purity was
95%. Samples were dissolved, and SEM was characterized, as
described in Supporting Information.
Surgery and Animal Care. All procedures involving animals were
performed according to EC guidelines (EC Council Directive 86/
609, 1987), to the Italian legislation on animal experimentation
(Decreto L. vo 116/92) and to protocols approved by the Animal
Care and Use Committee of the University of Milan-Bicocca
(IACUC 37/07). Female SpragueDawley rats underwent a lami-
nectomy. Surgeries were performed via an OPMI-pico surgical
microscope (Zeiss). A 2 cm longitudinal skin incision was cen-
tered over the T9-T10 spinous process along the midline. With-
out disrupting the duramater, the tenth thoracic (T10) spinal seg-
ment was exposed by removing the dorsal part of the vertebra.
The medial and ventral parts of the vertebra, spared by the sur-
gery, allowed for weight support, thus not requiring the implan-
tation of an additional osteosynthesis device. The exposed cord
was contused by a 10 gr weight dropped from a height of 25 mm
by using a MASCIS impactor device (Rutgers University). The im-
pact velocity and compression were monitored and recorded to
A
RTIC
LE
www.acsnano.org VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ 227–236 ▪ 2011 233
guarantee consistency between animals. After injury, the
muscles were sutured and the skin was closed with wound clips.
After four weeks, when approximately 76% of the injured rats
had survived, animals were randomly divided into three main ex-
perimental groups. After re-exposure of the lesioned spinal cord,
meninges were incised, scar tissue and debris were removed
via myelotomy, and saline solution was added (Group O, N 
15). Following scar tissue removal, groups 1 and 2 were submit-
ted to the insertion of 1013 electrospun tubes of 23 mm
length. PBS-soaked tubes were easily peeled off the needles via
surgical forceps. In group 1 (N 16) the guidance channels were
filled only with RADA16-I-BMHP1. In group 2 (N 24) RADA16-I-
BMHP1 was mixed with the following growth factors: brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (1 mg/mL) and ciliary neurotrophic
factor (1 mg/mL), both involved in neuronal development, sur-
vival, outgrowth, and neural regeneration in vivo;32 vascular en-
dothelial growth factor (1 mg/mL), capable of promoting angio-
genesis;31 and chondroitinase ABC (60 mU/L), proven to
remove the side chains of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in
the gliotic scar.7
Special attention was focused on avoiding tube collapse by
holding wetted channels in place with one or both forcep braces
and positioned tubes by gently placing them one by one along
the longitudinal SC axis and constructing a horizontal layer at the
time. Four layers of tubes were usually necessary to fill the de-
brided injury site. The electrospun lamina positioned over the in-
jury site was sutured with the dura mater. Animals were moni-
tored for autophagia, and the bladders were expressed manually
until voiding reflexes were re-established. See Supporting Infor-
mation for a detailed description of the protocol.
Behavioral Analysis. Recovery of hind limb stepping move-
ments in injured rats was evaluated using the Basso, Beattie,
and Bresnahan (BBB) open-field locomotor test at 1 week after
treatment and, subsequently, every two weeks.34 Animals were
blind-tested individually in an open-field testing area indepen-
dently by two operators and were video-monitored with a digi-
tal camera. BBB scores, ranging from 0 (no hind limb movement)
to 21 (coordinated gait with parallel paw placement), reflect
combinations of rat hindlimb movements, trunk position and
stability, stepping, coordination, paw placement, toe clearance,
and tail position, representing sequential recovery stages that
rats attain after SCI.
Immunohistochemistry. Twenty-four weeks after the second sur-
gery, rats were perfused. The spinal cords were dissected, post-
fixed for 4 h in 4% paraformaldehyde and cryoprotected in 30%
sucrose overnight. Transverse or longitudinal sections under-
went morphological evaluation via hematoxylin-eosin staining
or fluorescence analysis via immunostainings for the following
markers: antineurofilament NF200 (Sigma-Aldrich) for axons;
anti-SMI-32 and anti-SMI-31 (Covance) to detect the unphospho-
rylated and phosphorylated isoforms, respectively, of the heavy
subunit of neurofilament; anti-III-tubulin (Covance) for neurons;
antimyelin basic protein (MBP) (Sternberger Monoclonals Incor-
porated) for myelin; antigrowth associated protein GAP-43
(Chemicon International) for growth cones and regenerating
nerve fibers; anti- P4HB for fibroblasts (Acris); anti-Von Wille-
brand factor VWF for endothelial cells (Dako); antiglial fibrillary
acidic protein GFAP (Chemicon International) for astrocytes; an-
tilaminin (Sigma-Aldrich) and antirat collagen IV (Cedarlene) as
main components of the basal lamina in nervous tissue; anti-
CD68 (Serotec) for macrophages; and anti-Iba-I (Wako) for micro-
glia and macrophages. See more details in the Supporting Infor-
mation. In transverse sections of spinal cord groups 1 and 2, we
quantified the percentage of electrospun tubes infiltrated with
fibers stained positive for nerve markers throughout the entire
length of the conduit. III-tubulin positive fibers and MBP-
wrapped fibers located in the inner lumen of 10 randomly cho-
sen guidance channels were counted. Total MBP positive fibers
were expressed as a percentage of the total III-tubulin positive
fibers for each animal, and values were then averaged for ani-
mals belonging to the same experimental group.
Electrophysiology. Electrophysiological investigation was per-
formed in 13 lesioned rats belonging to group 0 (N  4), group
1 (N  4), and group 2 (N  5). The same testing was also per-
formed on five control healthy rats. See Supporting Information
for a detailed description of the adopted methodology. Experi-
menters were blind to the treatment each animal had received.
L2L3 vertebrae were exposed. One Ag Teflon-insulated wire
(bare diameter 200 m, coated 280 m, A-M System Carlsborg)
exposed at the cathode was introduced through the L2L3 yel-
low ligament into the epidural space and referenced to an an-
ode, tight to the spinous process of L3. These electrodes, placed
in order to stimulate the cauda equina dorsal roots, also al-
lowed recording of volume conducted muscle potentials.44
Muscles originating these potentials were identified by this
group in separate experiments as IL and QL, excluding a pos-
sible origin frommore rostral epiaxial muscles. Holes were drilled
bilaterally in the exposed skull in correspondence to the sen-
sory motor cortex (3 mm antero-posterior, 2.5 mm lateral from
BREGMA) via a stereotaxic frame (Kopf Instruments). Through
these holes, the exposed tips of Ag Teflon-insulated wire were
placed over the dura and cemented in place. Additionally, Ag
Teflon-insulated wire electrodes were inserted into the left sple-
nium capitis (SC) and in the right and left biceps femoris (BF)
muscles. As to epicortical stimulation, under general anesthesia,
single stimuli (0.05 ms duration, interstimuls interval 7 s) were
delivered over the sensory motor cortex through the extradural
electrodes (impedance 40/60 K	, cathode at sensory cortex site,
anode at motor site). Both hemispheres were tested in separate
trials. See Supporting Information for a detailed description of
the motivations triggering the developed technique. Descend-
ing responses induced by the stimulus were recorded simulta-
neously from the cervical and the hindlimb intramuscular elec-
trodes in SC and BF and from the epidural electrode at the L2L3
site. The fastest response recorded in SC muscle, located above
the lesion, was used to control on each rat the efficacy of epicor-
tical stimulation. Signals were amplified, filtered (1 Hz3kHz),
and A/D converted (sampling rate 5kHz). The stimulus intensity
was varied in consecutive steps (range 14 mA) from threshold
to the intensity that saturated the amplitude of the response re-
corded at the spinal site. Five responses were recorded and av-
eraged for each intensity. For spinal cord stimulations, double
stimuli (0.05 ms duration, 3 ms apart) were delivered from the
epidural electrode, eliciting ascending evoked potentials in the
sensory motor cortex of both hemispheres. Signals were ampli-
fied, filtered (1 Hz3kHz), and A/D converted (sampling rate
5kHz). The stimulus intensity was varied in steps from threshold
to the intensity saturating the amplitude of the cortical response
(range 0.10.3 mA). Ten responses were averaged for each in-
tensity. For each animal and stimulus intensity we measured: (i)
the latency and peak-to-peak amplitude of the spinal descend-
ing responses and (ii) the latency of the first positive (P1) and first
negative (N1) peaks and the P1N1 peak-to-peak amplitude of
the cortical evoked potentials.
Statistical Analysis. Data were processed using SigmaStat 3.1
software (Systat Software Inc.). Values are reported as mean 
SEM. Significance analysis of the percentage of positive micro-
conduits between group 1 and group 2 was performed via
MannWhitney rank sum test, and values were considered sig-
nificantly different for P  0.05. BBB score significance tests
among groups were performed by one-way ANOVA and pair-
wise Tukey. Scores were considered significantly different for P
 0.05. As for electrophysiology data, a two-way ANOVA (factors:
experimental group vs side) was used to compare the ampli-
tude and the latency of the maximal descending responses ob-
tained by cortical stimulation as well as the amplitude and la-
tency of the ascending responses. All analyses were two-tailed
and P 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Post hoc
analysis was performed with the Tukey’s HSD test for unequal
number of samples.
Acknowledgment. We gratefully thank CARIPLO foundation,
Regione Lombardia and the Nicholas G. and Dorotha K. Dumbros
Scholarship and Fellowship Fund for providing financial sup-
port to the project.
Note Added after ASAP Publication: One of the affiliations for
Angelo Vescovi was incorrectly stated. The corrected version
was published on January 6, 2011.
A
RT
IC
LE
VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ GELAIN ET AL. www.acsnano.org234
Supporting Information Available: Figure S1 and Supplemen-
tary Methods. This material is available free of charge via the In-
ternet at http://pubs.acs.org.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Bunge, R. P.; Puckett, W. R.; Becerra, J. L.; Marcillo, A.;
Quencer, R. M. Observations on the Pathology of Human
Spinal Cord Injury. A Review and Classification of 22 New
Cases with Details from a Case of Chronic Cord
Compression with Extensive Focal Demyelination. Adv.
Neurol. 1993, 59, 75–89.
2. Crowe, M. J.; Bresnahan, J. C.; Shuman, S. L.; Masters, J. N.;
Beattie, M. S. Apoptosis and Delayed Degeneration after
Spinal Cord Injury in Rats and Monkeys. Nat. Med. 1997, 3,
73–6.
3. Bunge, M. B. Bridging Areas of Injury in the Spinal Cord.
Neuroscientist 2001, 7, 325–39.
4. Fawcett, J. W. The Glial Response to Injury and Its Role in
the Inhibition of Cns Repair. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2006, 557,
11–24.
5. Chan, C. C. Inflammation: Beneficial or Detrimental after
Spinal Cord Injury. Recent Pat. CNS Drug Discovery 2008, 3,
189–99.
6. Neumann, S.; Bradke, F.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.; Basbaum, A. I.
Regeneration of Sensory Axons within the Injured Spinal
Cord Induced by Intraganglionic Camp Elevation. Neuron
2002, 34, 885–93.
7. Bradbury, E. J.; Moon, L. D.; Popat, R. J.; King, V. R.; Bennett,
G. S.; Patel, P. N.; Fawcett, J. W.; McMahon, S. B.
Chondroitinase Abc Promotes Functional Recovery after
Spinal Cord Injury. Nature 2002, 416, 636–40.
8. Kwon, B. K.; Liu, J.; Messerer, C.; Kobayashi, N. R.; McGraw,
J.; Oschipok, L.; Tetzlaff, W. Survival and Regeneration of
Rubrospinal Neurons 1 Year after Spinal Cord Injury. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99, 3246–51.
9. Pallini, R. Anatomy Of ”Regenerating Axons. Science 1998,
280, 181–2.
10. Bareyre, F. M.; Schwab, M. E. Inflammation, Degeneration
and Regeneration in the Injured Spinal Cord: Insights from
DNA Microarrays. Trends Neurosci. 2003, 26, 555–63.
11. Fouad, K.; Schnell, L.; Bunge, M. B.; Schwab, M. E.;
Liebscher, T.; Pearse, D. D. Combining Schwann Cell
Bridges and Olfactory-Ensheathing Glia Grafts with
Chondroitinase Promotes Locomotor Recovery after
Complete Transection of the Spinal Cord. J. Neurosci. 2005,
25, 1169–78.
12. Watanabe, K.; Nakamura, M.; Iwanami, A.; Fujita, Y.;
Kanemura, Y.; Toyama, Y.; Okano, H. Comparison between
Fetal Spinal-Cord- and Forebrain-Derived Neural
Stem/Progenitor Cells as a Source of Transplantation for
Spinal Cord Injury. Dev. Neurosci. 2004, 26, 275–87.
13. Ramer, M. S.; Priestley, J. V.; McMahon, S. B. Functional
Regeneration of Sensory Axons into the Adult Spinal Cord.
Nature 2000, 403, 312–6.
14. Shapiro, S.; Borgens, R.; Pascuzzi, R.; Roos, K.; Groff, M.;
Purvines, S.; Rodgers, R. B.; Hagy, S.; Nelson, P. Oscillating
Field Stimulation for Complete Spinal Cord Injury in
Humans: A Phase 1 Trial. J. Neurosurg. Spine 2005, 2, 3–10.
15. Engesser-Cesar, C.; Anderson, A. J.; Basso, D. M.; Edgerton,
V. R.; Cotman, C. W. Voluntary Wheel Running Improves
Recovery from a Moderate Spinal Cord Injury.
J. Neurotrauma 2005, 22, 157–71.
16. Takami, T.; Oudega, M.; Bates, M. L.; Wood, P. M.; Kleitman,
N.; Bunge, M. B. Schwann Cell but Not Olfactory
Ensheathing Glia Transplants Improve Hindlimb
Locomotor Performance in the Moderately Contused
Adult Rat Thoracic Spinal Cord. J. Neurosci. 2002, 22, 6670–
81.
17. Kadoya, K.; Tsukada, S.; Lu, P.; Coppola, G.; Geschwind, D.;
Filbin, M. T.; Blesch, A.; Tuszynski, M. H. Combined Intrinsic
and Extrinsic Neuronal Mechanisms Facilitate Bridging
Axonal Regeneration One Year after Spinal Cord Injury.
Neuron 2009, 64, 165–72.
18. Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S.; Eftekharpour, E.; Wang, J.; Schut,
D.; Fehlings, M. G. Synergistic Effects of Transplanted Adult
Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells, Chondroitinase, and Growth
Factors Promote Functional Repair and Plasticity of the
Chronically Injured Spinal Cord. J. Neurosci. 2010, 30, 9.
19. Schreyer, D. J.; Jones, E. G. Growth of Corticospinal Axons
on Prosthetic Substrates Introduced into the Spinal Cord
of Neonatal Rats. Brain Res. 1987, 432, 291–9.
20. Tsai, E. C.; Dalton, P. D.; Shoichet, M. S.; Tator, C. H. Matrix
Inclusion within Synthetic Hydrogel Guidance Channels
Improves Specific Supraspinal and Local Axonal
Regeneration after Complete Spinal Cord Transection.
Biomaterials 2006, 27, 519–33.
21. Teng, Y. D.; Lavik, E. B.; Qu, X.; Park, K. I.; Ourednik, J.;
Zurakowski, D.; Langer, R.; Snyder, E. Y. Functional
Recovery Following Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury Mediated
by a Unique Polymer Scaffold Seeded with Neural Stem
Cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99, 3024–9.
22. Oudega, M.; Gautier, S. E.; Chapon, P.; Fragoso, M.; Bates,
M. L.; Parel, J. M.; Bunge, M. B. Axonal Regeneration into
Schwann Cell Grafts within Resorbable Poly(Alpha-
Hydroxyacid) Guidance Channels in the Adult Rat Spinal
Cord. Biomaterials 2001, 22, 1125–36.
23. Deumens, R.; Koopmans, G. C.; Honig, W. M.; Maquet, V.;
Jerome, R.; Steinbusch, H. W.; Joosten, E. A. Chronically
Injured Corticospinal Axons Do Not Cross Large Spinal
Lesion Gaps after a Multifactorial Transplantation Strategy
Using Olfactory Ensheathing Cell/Olfactory Nerve
Fibroblast-Biomatrix Bridges. J. Neurosci. Res. 2006, 83,
811–20.
24. Cai, J.; Ziemba, K. S.; Smith, G. M.; Jin, Y. Evaluation of
Cellular Organization and Axonal Regeneration through
Linear Pla Foam Implants in Acute and Chronic Spinal
Cord Injury. J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 2007, 83, 512–20.
25. Gelain, F. Novel Opportunities and Challenges Offered by
Nanobiomaterials in Tissue Engineering. Int. J. Nanomed.
2008, 3, 415–24.
26. Li, W. J.; Mauck, R. L.; Cooper, J. A.; Yuan, X.; Tuan, R. S.
Engineering Controllable Anisotropy in Electrospun
Biodegradable Nanofibrous Scaffolds for Musculoskeletal
Tissue Engineering. J. Biomech. 2007, 40, 1686–93.
27. Ellis-Behnke, R. G.; Liang, Y. X.; You, S. W.; Tay, D. K.; Zhang,
S.; So, K. F.; Schneider, G. E. Nano Neuro Knitting: Peptide
Nanofiber Scaffold for Brain Repair and Axon
Regeneration with Functional Return of Vision. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2006, 103, 5054–9.
28. Prabhakaran, M. P.; Venugopal, J.; Chyan, T. T.; Hai, L. B.;
Chan, C. K.; Tang, A. L.; Ramakrishna, S. Electrospun
Biocomposite Nanofibrous Scaffolds for Neural Tissue
Engineering. Tissue Eng., Part A 2008, .
29. Gelain, F.; Unsworth, L. D.; Zhang, S. Slow and Sustained
Release of Active Cytokines from Self-Assembling Peptide
Scaffolds. J. Controlled Release 2010, 145, 231–239.
30. Gelain, F.; Bottai, D.; Vescovi, A.; Zhang, S. Designer Self-
Assembling Peptide Nanofiber Scaffolds for Adult Mouse
Neural Stem Cell 3-Dimensional Cultures. PLoS One 2006,
1, e119.
31. Wilcke, I.; Lohmeyer, J. A.; Liu, S.; Condurache, A.; Kruger,
S.; Mailander, P.; Machens, H. G. Vegf(165) and Bfgf
Protein-Based Therapy in a Slow Release System to
Improve Angiogenesis in a Bioartificial Dermal Substitute
in Vitro and in Vivo. Langenbecks Arch. Surg. 2007, 392,
305–14.
32. Storer, P. D.; Dolbeare, D.; Houle, J. D. Treatment of
Chronically Injured Spinal Cord with Neurotrophic Factors
Stimulates Betaii-Tubulin and Gap-43 Expression in
Rubrospinal Tract Neurons. J. Neurosci. Res. 2003, 74, 502–
11.
33. Radojicic, M.; Nistor, G.; Keirstead, H. S. Ascending Central
Canal Dilation and Progressive Ependymal Disruption in a
Contusion Model of Rodent Chronic Spinal Cord Injury.
BMC Neurol. 2007, 7, 30.
A
RTIC
LE
www.acsnano.org VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ 227–236 ▪ 2011 235
34. Basso, D. M.; Beattie, M. S.; Bresnahan, J. C.; Anderson,
D. K.; Faden, A. I.; Gruner, J. A.; Holford, T. R.; Hsu, C. Y.;
Noble, L. J.; Nockels, R.; et al. Mascis Evaluation of Open
Field Locomotor Scores: Effects of Experience and
Teamwork on Reliability. Multicenter Animal Spinal Cord
Injury Study. J. Neurotrauma 1996, 13, 343–59.
35. Norenberg, M. D.; Smith, J.; Marcillo, A. The Pathology of
Human Spinal Cord Injury: Defining the Problems.
J. Neurotrauma 2004, 21, 429–40.
36. Bamber, N. I.; Li, H.; Aebischer, P.; Xu, X. M. Fetal Spinal
Cord Tissue in Mini-Guidance Channels Promotes
Longitudinal Axonal Growth after Grafting into
Hemisected Adult Rat Spinal Cords. Neural Plast. 1999, 6,
103–21.
37. Novikova, L. N.; Novikov, L. N.; Kellerth, J. O. Biopolymers
and Biodegradable Smart Implants for Tissue
Regeneration after Spinal Cord Injury. Curr. Opin. Neurol.
2003, 16, 711–5.
38. Sun, H.; Mei, L.; Song, C.; Cui, X.; Wang, P. The in Vivo
Degradation, Absorption and Excretion of Pcl-Based
Implant. Biomaterials 2006, 27, 1735–40.
39. Gelain, F.; Lomander, A.; Vescovi, A. L.; Zhang, S.
Systematic Studies of a Self-Assembling Peptide Nanofiber
Scaffold with Other Scaffolds. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol.
2007, 7, 424–34.
40. Koh, H. S.; Yong, T.; Chan, C. K.; Ramakrishna, S.
Enhancement of Neurite Outgrowth Using Nano-
Structured Scaffolds Coupled with Laminin. Biomaterials
2008, 29, 3574–82.
41. Georges, P. C.; Miller, W. J.; Meaney, D. F.; Sawyer, E. S.;
Janmey, P. A. Matrices with Compliance Comparable to
That of Brain Tissue Select Neuronal over Glial Growth in
Mixed Cortical Cultures. Biophys. J. 2006, 90, 3012–8.
42. Anderson, C. R.; Ashwell, K. W. S.; Collewijn, H.; Conta, A.;
Harvey, A.; Heise, C.; Hodgetts, S.; Holstege, G.; Kayalioglu,
G.; Keast, J. R. The Spinal Cord; Academic Press: London,
2009.
43. Skene, J. H.; Willard, M. Axonally Transported Proteins
Associated with Axon Growth in Rabbit Central and
Peripheral Nervous Systems. J. Cell Biol. 1981, 89, 96–103.
44. Zileli, M.; Schramm, J. Spinal and Muscular Evoked
Response Following Single Stimulation of the Motor
Cortex of the Rat. EEG EMG Z. Elektroenzephalogr.
Elektromyogr. Verwandte Geb. 1989, 20, 106–11.
45. Bjorklund, A. S. G. Descending Monoaminergic Projections to
the Spinal Cord; Biomedical Press: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 1982.
46. Hammar, I.; Stecina, K.; Jankowska, E. Differential
Modulation by Monoamine Membrane Receptor Agonists
of Reticulospinal Input to Lamina Viii Feline Spinal
Commissural Interneurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2007, 26, 1205–
12.
47. Hultborn, H.; Brownstone, R. B.; Toth, T. I.; Gossard, J. P. Key
Mechanisms for Setting the Input-Output Gain across the
Motoneuron Pool. Prog. Brain Res. 2004, 143, 77–95.
48. Fridrikh, S. V.; Yu, J. H.; Brenner, M. P.; Rutledge, G. C.
Controlling the Fiber Diameter During Electrospinning.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 144502.
A
RT
IC
LE
VOL. 5 ▪ NO. 1 ▪ GELAIN ET AL. www.acsnano.org236
