BRIEF COMMUNICATION
Improvement of hind-limb paralysis following traumatic spinal
cord injury in rats by grafting normal human keratinocytes:
new cell-therapy strategy for nerve regeneration
Hajime Inoue • Mitsuko Takenaga •
Yuki Ohta • Miyuki Tomioka • Yu-Ichi Watabe •
Masaki Aihara • Norio Kumagai
Received: 28 March 2011 / Accepted: 28 July 2011 / Published online: 13 August 2011
 The Japanese Society for Artificial Organs 2011
Abstract Somatic (adult) stem cells are thought to have
pluripotency, just as do embryotic stem (ES) cells. We
investigated the possibility that grafted epithelial kerati-
nocytes could induce spinal cord regeneration in an animal
model of spinal cord injury (SCI). Normal human kerati-
nocytes were cultured by the routine technique, and normal
human dermal fibroblasts were cultured by a similar
method as a control group. SCI model was prepared by
dropping a 10-g weight onto the exposed spinal cord of rats
from a height of 25 mm, and 8 days later, the cultured cells
were grafted into the injury site. Motor function was sig-
nificantly improved in the cultured-keratinocyte-grafted
group compared with that in the fibroblast-grafted group.
After functional observation, human nestin- and nuclei-
positive cells were found at the grafted spinal cord. Grafted
cultured keratinocytes induced in vitro morphological
changes in the neural induction medium. These results
indicated one possibility that some of the grafted cultured
keratinocytes survived and could have contributed to neu-
ral regeneration. On the other hand, it should be noted that
the grafted cultured keratinocytes secreted a large amount
of enzymes and/or growth factors. Therefore, another
possibility is that the grafted-keratinocyte-derived factors
could induce survived cell growth and endogenous neural
differentiation of spinal-nerve-derived stem cells sur-
rounding the injured spinal cord, leading to functional
recovery. Epithelial stem cell therapy may be applied
clinically in the near future to treat SCI.
Keywords Spinal cord injury  Cultured keratinocytes 
Nerve regeneration  Cell therapy  Regenerative medicine
Introduction
Various techniques have recently been tried in an attempt
to treat spinal cord injury (SCI) [1–3]. Nerve protection
against acute-phase inflammatory response is important as
an early-stage intervention in treating central nervous
system (CNS) injuries, but its only objective is to protect
normal tissue in the surrounding region [4]. Even if various
drugs, such as so-called radical scavengers, are used as
acute-phase therapy for CNS damage, no repair or regen-
eration of the injured region can be expected. Although
H. Inoue  M. Tomioka  M. Aihara  N. Kumagai
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1 Sugao,
Miyamae, Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan
e-mail: m2tomy@marianna-u.ac.jp
M. Aihara
e-mail: m2aihara@marianna-u.ac.jp
N. Kumagai
e-mail: n2kuma@marianna-u.ac.jp
H. Inoue (&)
Institute of Advanced Medical Science,
St. Marianna University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae, Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan
e-mail: h2inoue@marianna-u.ac.jp
H. Inoue  Y.-I. Watabe (&)
Division of Stem Cell Therapy (Endowed Chair
by ANGFA Co.), St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae, Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan
e-mail: y.watabe@marianna-u.ac.jp
M. Takenaga  Y. Ohta
Institute of Medical Science, St. Marianna University
School of Medicine, 2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae,
Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan
e-mail: m2take@marianna-u.ac.jp
Y. Ohta
e-mail: yuki-o@marianna-u.ac.jp
123
J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380
DOI 10.1007/s10047-011-0598-0
applications of embryonic stem (ES) cells and bone mar-
row stromal (stem) cells have been devised as a form of
regenerative medicine for treating CNS damage, the tech-
nique requires considerable time before its clinical appli-
cation because the mechanism of regulating their
differentiation cannot be reliably cleared [5]. In particular,
implementation of ES cell technology will be a lengthy
process unless definite differentiation induction techniques
are established [5], and the ethical issues surrounding ES
cell use have not been resolved.
On the other hand, bone marrow stromal/stem cells have
been confirmed to be pluripotent and are being used for
regeneration of both the spinal cord and myocardium [6].
Autologous stem cells contained in bone marrow and adi-
pose tissue, both of which are mesenchymal tissues, have
been used experimentally to treat paralysis associated with
SCI [7, 8]. The reason autologous mesenchymal stem cells,
such as bone marrow stromal cells and adipose-tissue-
derived stem cells, are being used is that they can be col-
lected in large numbers without any ethical problems. Bone
marrow stromal cells are capable of differentiating into
liver and nervous system as well as into bone, cartilage, fat,
and myocardium tissues [9, 10], meaning that bone marrow
stromal (stem) cells, which are part of the mesenchymal
system, can convert into an ectodermal system. Thus, if the
target organ or tissue for differentiation induction were the
same ectodermal system, the stem cells of the same ger-
minal system might be able to transform into the target
tissues or organs more effectively. Oshima et al. [11, 12]
reported that keratinocytes in hair follicles have stem-cell-
like multipotency despite being dermal components, and we
actually observed acceleration of granulation and healing of
refractory skin ulcers after grafting cultured keratinocytes.
In this study, we investigated the possibility of cultured
keratinocytes differentiating into nervous tissue, which is
an ectoderm-derived tissue, by performing an experiment
on a model of SCI in the rat.
Materials and methods
Cell source
Normal human surplus skin was collected aseptically dur-
ing plastic surgery. The skin was cut into 2-mm fragments,
and the fragments were sterilized by immersion in povi-
done iodine for 2 min at ambient temperature. The skin
fragments were digested for 18 h at 4C with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.25% trypsin and then
gently stirred for 60 min at ambient temperature in Dul-
becco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) containing
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). To separate free cells from
the digested skin, the suspension was filtered with Cell-
Strainer (Japan B.D. Co., Tokyo Japan). The filtrate was
used for keratinocyte culture, and the digested skin residue
was used for fibroblast culture. This investigation was
approved by the Bioethics Committee (No. 1295) based on
the Guidelines for Clinical Experimentation of St. Mari-
anna University School of Medicine.
Keratinocyte culture
Normal human keratinocytes were cultured by the method
described by Rheinwald and Green [13]. The filtrate
described above was centrifuged for 5 min at 4009g at 4C,
and the cell pellet obtained was resuspended in F-12/DMEM
(1/3) containing both 10% FBS and a cocktail of various
growth factors [insulin, T3, human epithelial growth factor
(hEGF), transferrin and cholera toxin]. The cell suspension
obtained was seeded onto gamma-ray-irradiated cultured
3T3 feeder cells. The cells were incubated for the first 4 days
at 37C under an atmosphere containing 10% carbon diox-
ide, and the medium was changed every 2 days until the cells
reached 80% confluence under the same culture conditions.
To remove the 3T3 cell remnants from the cultured kerati-
nocytes, culture dishes were thoroughly rinsed with PBS
containing 0.02% ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), and
the keratinocytes were isolated by routine trypsin treatment.
The keratinocyte suspension was adjusted to 5 9 107 cells/ml
with PBS and used in the experimental model of SCI. In
this case, the keratinocytes used in this study were not
cultured from specific dissected hair follicle or other niche
region. Rochat et al. [14] defined the excellent proliferated
cells cultured under the above condition as keratinocytes.
Therefore, these cultured cells are classified into the tran-
sient amplified keratinocytes. In this study, these cultured
cells were also named keratinocytes.
Fibroblast culture
A few fragments of the enzyme-digested skin residue were
placed on culture dishes, and sterilized cover glasses were
placed on the residue to prevent floating. The skin frag-
ments were cultured under an atmosphere containing 5%
carbon dioxide until fibroblasts migrated onto the culture
dish at 37C. After the fibroblasts were treated by the
routine method, they were subcultured on DMEM con-
taining 10% FBS until cells reached 80% confluence. The
fibroblast suspension was adjusted to 5 9 107 cells/ml with
PBS and used in the experimental model of SCI.
SCI model in rats: cell transplantation,
and evaluation of motor function
Adult female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats weighing
249.0 ± 7.07 g (Japan SLC, Shizuoka, Japan) were deeply
376 J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380
123
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pento-
barbital (40 mg/kg). A dorsal laminectomy was performed
at the thoracic level T9–10 vertebra. A 10-g weight was
dropped onto the exposed spinal cord from a height of
25 mm, inflicting a moderate contusion injury [15, 16]. The
animals were allowed to recover from the anesthesia on a
heating pad maintained at 36.5C. To prevent wound
infection, penicillin-G (1 mg/kg s.c., Meiji Seika Co.,
Tokyo, Japan) was used as an antibiotic. On the eighth day
after injury, human keratinocytes (5 9 106 cells/5 ml)
were grafted at the site of injury with a microsyringe [17].
As a control, human fibroblast cells (5 9 106 cells/5 ml)
were transplanted. Cyclosporine A (3 mg/kg/day) was
injected subcutaneously for 4 days before and after the cell
graft. Motor function was assessed using the Basso Beattie
Bresnahan (BBB) [15, 16] open-field locomotor scale.
Animals were allowed to walk around freely in a circular
field (1.2 m in diameter) for 10 min while movements of
the hind limbs were closely observed. The BBB locomotor
scale includes frequency and quality of hind-limb and fore-
limb/hind-limb coordination. From these observations, the
animal received a score between 0 and 21, where 0 indi-
cates total absence of movement, and 21 indicates normal
movement. Two researchers were trained as observers to
evaluate the animals on the BBB scale. All observers were
unaware of the group identity of the animals. Rating of
each animal was later checked by slow-playback video
recordings of each animal walking. Scores for the left and
right extremities were averaged. All animals were housed
in an animal room maintained at 23 ± 1C and 50–60%
humidity under a 12-h light/dark cycle, with free access to
food and water. This investigation was approved by the
Animal Care and Use Committee, based on the Guideline
for Animal Experimentation of St. Marianna University
Graduate School of Medicine.
Immunostaining
Animals were perfused with cold physiological saline and
4% paraformaldehyde under anesthesia, after which the
segment of spinal cord (1.5-cm long) containing the center
of the damaged region was removed and further fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h. Tissue was cryoprotected
by immersion in 10% sucrose phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) for 1 h and overnight in 30% sucrose-PBS at 4C.
Spinal cord specimen was then frozen in embedding com-
pound (Tissue-Tek, Sakura, Torrance, CA, USA) and sliced
into 20-lm thickness on a cryostat and placed on poly-
L-lysine-coated glass slides. Goat anti-human nestin anti-
body (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Co., CA, USA) or mouse
anti-human nuclei monoclonal antibody (Chemicon Inter-
national Co., CA, USA) was used to identify the grafted
cells. Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-goat
immunoglobulin (Ig)G (Chemicon international) or rho-
damine-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Rockland Immuno-
chemicals Co., Gilbertsville, PA, USA) was used as the
secondary antibodies. In vitro neural induction was carried
out and cultured in neural induction medium [DMEM/F-12
(GIBCO) containing N2 Plus Media Supplement, EGF, and
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)]. After fixing the
cells, immunocytochemical staining was performed. Mouse
anti-b-III-tubulin (Promega Co., Tokyo) and mouse anti-
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, Sigma-Aldrich Co.
MO, USA) were used as the primary antibodies. FITC-
conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Sigma-Aldrich) or rhodamine-
conjugated anti-mouse IgG was used as the secondary
antibodies. Before mounting, each section was counter-
stained with 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Life
Technologies Japan, Tokyo).
Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD).
The statistical significance was evaluated using the Mann–
Whitney U test, and P \ 0.05 was used as the criterion for
significance.
Results
Transplantation of cultured human keratinocytes
to SCI rats (Fig. 1)
The contusive spinal cord resulted in complete paralysis.
The BBB score of functional behavior was 3.70 ± 1.95
(mean ± SD, n = 5) on day 8 after injury, whereas that of
another group was 3.10 ± 2.07 (n = 5). There was no
significant difference between the two. Human keratinocyte
transplantation promoted recovery from hind-limb loco-
motor dysfunction. Three days after cell transplantation, the
BBB score was 6.70 ± 2.6 when compared with that prior
to cell graft. Human-fibroblast-grafted animals (control)
showed gradual but significantly less potent recovery
(Fig. 1a). After 4 weeks, some animals in the human-ker-
atinocyte-grafted group could walk with fore-limb/hind-
limb coordination and could perform integrated voluntary
motor movements. Those in the control group also recov-
ered motor function, but some crawled persistently and
moved without weight bearing. There was a significant
difference between groups from day 6 after transplantation.
The BBB score of all SCI animals reached a plateau
4 weeks after transplantation, when grafted animals had
significantly better locomotor function (12.8 ± 1.9) com-
pared with controls (9.4 ± 0.8) (P \ 0.01).
After functional observation, histological analysis was
performed. There were human-nestin-positive cells around
J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380 377
123
the injured spinal cord (Fig. 1b, c), some of which were
positive for human nuclei (Fig. 1d).
Morphological change of keratinocytes in vitro
When human keratinocytes (Fig. 2a) were cultured in the
neural induction medium, morphological change was
observed (Fig. 2b–e). They were positive for GFAP and
b-III-tubulin neural markers.
Discussion
A new category of regenerative medicine, adult stem cell
therapy, has recently been devised to repair damaged
organs and tissues. In general, bone marrow stromal cells
and adipocyte stem cells are used for stem cell therapy [18,
19]. This study demonstrated that grafted human kerati-
nocytes improved the hind-limb motor function of SCI rats
and that the improvement was significantly greater than in
the fibroblast-grafted group (control). As another control,
the vehicle used to suspend the cultured human keratino-
cytes should have been used. In this study, the human-
cultured fibroblasts were chosen as a control instead, as
there was concern that nonspecific stimulation of the
grafted cells might have influenced the results. Therefore,
this finding might indicate the possibility of autologous cell
therapy for CNS damage. Although keratinocyte stem cells
are present in hair follicles and basal cell layer of the
epidermis [20], neural differentiation of stem cells has
never been reported.
Whether the grafted cultured keratinocytes are stem
cells is of great importance. Rochat et al. [14] defined that
the cells with excellent proliferation rate under the same
culture condition as implemented in our study were
keratinocyte stem cells. On the other hand, Ohyama et al.
[21] obtained CD200-positive cells purified from human
bulge stem cells. CD200-positive cells are considered to be
important as markers of keratinocyte stem cells, and further
study would be needed as to whether the grafted cultured
keratinocytes were positive for CD200. In this investiga-
tion, cells containing keratinocytes were collected from
full\-thickness skin of the forearm and then cultured. The
skin specimens were enzyme digested directly by trypsin
without skin dissection. As Amoh [22] reported, we did not
dissect hair follicles only from the skin specimen. How-
ever, it would be important that cells obtained from the
nondissected skin specimen have the potential to promote
functional recovery following cell graft.
Human-derived cells (human nuclei and nestin-positive
cells) were found in the grafting region, indicating that the
grafted human keratinocyte in the rat spinal cord survived.
Nestin-positive stem cells in hair-follicle bulges have been
reported to have the potential to differentiate into kerati-
nocytes and neurons [23]. Nestin, a specific intermediate
filament protein, is expressed in ectodermal neural
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56
human keratinocyte stem cells
B
B
B
 S
co
re
Day after injury
human fibroblasts
(A)
(B) (C) (D) (E)
Fig. 1 Transplantation of keratinocyte stem cells to rats with spinal
cord injury (SCI). Upper functional recovery from SCI-induced motor
dysfunction. a On the eighth day after injury, human keratinocyte
stem cells, and fibroblasts as control (5 9 106 cells), were grafted at
the center of the injured region (arrow). Open circle keratinocyte
group. Closed circle fibroblast group (control). Basso Beattie
Bresnahan (BBB) scores were monitored before and after cell
transplantation (mean ± standard deviation, n = 5). *P \ 0.05,
**0.01: compared with data obtained from control group.
b, c Nestin-like immunoreactants (green) expressed in injured region
of the rat spinal cord. d Human nucleus (red) was also stained in
grafted region. e Some were double-positive cells (arrow). b Scale
bar 500 lm. c, d Scale bar 100 lm, e Scale bar 50 lm
378 J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380
123
progenitor cells and is specifically expressed during CNS
formation. In vitro morphological changes were observed
when grafted keratinocytes were cultured in the neural
induction medium. They expressed neuron-specific mark-
ers. Therefore, one possibility would be that some of the
grafted keratinocytes might have differentiated into neuron-
like cells or existed in the form of stem-cell-like keratino-
cytes. Li [23] showed that nestin-positive cells are present
in hair follicles, whereas Amoh [24] demonstrated that hair-
follicle stem cells, which have pluripotency, are capable of
differentiating in to neurons, glial cells, and keratinocytes.
Hoffman [25] reported that hair-follicle stem cells showed
their pluripotency, such as neurons, and were valuable for
various therapeutic purposes Another possibility of kerati-
nocyte-mediated neurogenesis would be that many kinds of
neurotrophic factors and glycosidase secreted by the grafted
keratinocyte might have contributed to re-forming the
neural network system surrounding the injured spinal cord.
Actually, we already reported that keratinocytes secrete
various glycosidases, proteases, and growth factors [26].
Secreted glycosidase might have hydrolyzed the proteo-
glycan of the damaged neural site. Neurotrophic factors
could have induced survived cell growth and endogenous
neural differentiation of spinal-nerve-derived stem cells
surrounding the injured spinal cord, leading to functional
recovery. We are now investigating these possibilities.
In clinical application, although tissue collection from
patients is indispensable to organ- or tissue-regenerative
medicine, it is important to minimize surgical invasion.
Collection of bone marrow stromal cells is more invasive
than collection of small amounts of adipose tissue or skin
fragments. As large numbers of keratinocytes can be easily
cultured from small skin fragments, in the future, stem cell
therapy may be applied to treating SCI as well as to
treating refractory skin ulcers.
References
1. Parr AM, Kulbatski I, Zahir T, Wang X, Yue C, Keating A, Tator
CH. Transplanted adult spinal cord-derived neural stem/progen-
itor cells promote early functional recovery after rat spinal cord
injury. Neuroscience. 2008;155:760–70.
2. Urdzı́ková L, Jendelová P, Glogarová K, Burian M, Hájek M,
Syková E. Transplantation of bone marrow stem cells as well as
mobilization by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor promotes
recovery after spinal cord injury in rats. J Neurotrauma.
2006;23:1379–91.
3. Hurlbert RJ, Hamilton MG. Methylprednisolone for acute spinal
cord injury: 5-year practice reversal. Can J Neurol Sci.
2008;35:41–5.
4. Yu QJ, Zhou QS, Huang HB, Wang YL, Tian SF, Duan DM.
Protective effect of ketamine on ischemic spinal cord injury in
rabbits. Ann Vasc Surg. 2008;22:432–9.
5. Kim BG, Hwang DH, Lee SI, Kim EJ, Kim SU. Stem cell-based
cell therapy for spinal cord injury. Cell Transpl. 2007;16:355–64.
6. Nandoe Tewarie RD, Hurtado A, Levi AD, Grotenhuis JA,
Oudega M. Bone marrow stromal cells for repair of the spinal
cord: towards clinical application. Cell Transpl. 2006;15:563–77.
7. Kang SK, Shin MJ, Jung JS, Kim YG, Kim CH. Autologous
adipose tissue-derived stromal cells for treatment of spinal cord
injury. Stem Cells Dev. 2006;15:583–94.
Fig. 2 Morphological change of keratinocytes. a Typical phase-
contrast image of keratinocytes cultured in normal medium. Scale
bars 100 lm, b–e morphological change after culture with neural
induction medium for 3 days. Scale bars 100 lm. b, d Typical phase-
contrast image. Immunocytochemical staining for (c) anti-glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and (e) b-III-tubulin
J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380 379
123
8. Hardy SA, Maltman DJ, Przyborski SA. Mesenchymal stem cells
as mediators of neural differentiation. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther.
2008;3:43–52.
9. Bi XB, Deng YB, Gan DH, Wang YZ. Salvianolic acid B pro-
motes survival of transplanted mesenchymal stem cells in spinal
cord injured rats. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2008;29:169–76.
10. Jung Y, Song J, Shiozawa Y, Wang J, Wang Z, Williams B,
Havens A, Schneider A, Ge C, Franceschi RT, McCauley LK,
Krebsbach PH, Taichman RS. Hematopoietic stem cells regulate
mesenchymal stromal cell induction into osteoblasts thereby
participating in the formation of the stem cell niche. Stem Cells.
2008;26:2042–51.
11. Oshima H, Rochat A, Kedzia C, Kobayashi K, Barrandon Y.
Morphogenesis and renewal of hair follicles from adult multi-
potent stem cells. Cell. 2001;104:233–45.
12. Claudinot S, Nicolas M, Oshima H, Rochat A, Barrandon Y.
Long-term renewal of hair follicles from clonogenic multipotent
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;102:14677–82.
13. Rheinwald JG, Green H. Serial cultivation of strains of human
epidermal keratinocytes. Cell. 1975;6:331–43.
14. Rochat A, Kobayashi K, Barrandon Y. Location of stem cells of
human hair follicles by clonal analysis. Cell. 1994;76:1063–73.
15. Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive ad reliable
locomoter rating scale for open field testing in rats. J Neuro-
trauma. 1995;12:1–21.
16. Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC, Anderson DK, Faden AI,
Gruner JA, Holford TR, Hsu CY, Noble LJ, Nockels R, Perot PL,
Salzman SK. Young W MASCIS evaluation of open field loco-
motor scores, Effect of experience and teamwork on reliability.
Multicenter animal spinal cord injury study. J Jeurotrauma.
1996;13:343–59.
17. Takenaga M, Ohta Y, Tokura Y, Hamaguchi A, Suzuki N, Na-
kamura M, Okano H, Igarashi R. Plasma as a saffold for
regeneration of neural precursor cells after transplantation into
rats with spinal cord injury. Cell Transpl. 2007;16:57–65.
18. Asahara T, Kawamoto A. Endothelial progenitor cells for post-
natal vasculogenesis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.
2004;287:C572–9.
19. Kajiguchi M, Kondo T, Izawa H, Kobayashi M, Yamamoto K,
Shintani S, Numaguchi Y, Naoe T, Takamatsu J, Komori K,
Murohara T. Safety and efficacy of autologous progenitor cell
transplantation for therapeutic angiogenesis in patients with
critical limb ischemia. Circ J. 2007;71:196–201.
20. Kloepper JE, Tiede S, Brinckmann J, Reinhardt DP, Meyer W,
Faessler R, Paus R. Immunophenotyping of the human bulge
region: the quest to define useful in situ markers for human
epithelial hair follicle stem cells and their niche. Exp Dermatol.
2008;17:592–609.
21. Ohyama M, Terunuma A, Tock CL, Radonovich MF, Pise-
Masison CA, Hopping SB, Brady JN, Udey MC, Vogel JC.
Characterization and isolation of stem cell-enriched human hair
follicle bulge cells. J Clin Invest. 2006;116:249–60.
22. Amoh Y, Li L, Katsuoka K, Hofffman RM. Multipotent hair
follicle stem cells promote repair of spinal cord injury and
recovery of walking function. Cell Cycle. 2008;7:1865–9.
23. Li L, Mignone J, Yang M, Matic M, Penman S, Enikolopov G,
Hoffman RM. Nestin expression in hair follicle sheath progenitor
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003;100:9958–61.
24. Amoh Y, Li L, Yang M, Moossa AR, Katsuoka K, Penman S.
Hoffman RM Nascent blood vessels in the skin arise from nestin-
expressing hair-follicle cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2004;101:13291–5.
25. Hoffman RM. The pluripotency of hair follicle stem cells. Cell
Cycle. 2006;5:232–3.
26. Inoue H. Technique for skin regeneration by using the cultured
epithelial stem cells. Frag J. 2009;1:26–32.
380 J Artif Organs (2011) 14:375–380
123
