eg
e
rger
ch,
Article history:
Received 29 June 2011
Accepted 14 December 2011
Keywords:
Spinal cord injury
Superoxide dismutase
Life Sciences 90 (2012) 360–364
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Life Sci
e lsIntroduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a serious health problem with high care
costs, and social and psychological burdens (Hodgetts et al. 2009).
Typically, traumatic SCI leads to functional losses due to axonal de-
struction and cell death (Schwab and Bartholdi, 1996). Trauma to
the spinal cord causes both primary and secondary damage. The pri-
mary damage refers to the loss of spinal cord integrity due to me-
chanical factors. The delayed secondary damage refers to a complex
array of pathophysiological processes including ischemia, edema,
inflammation, excitotoxicity and oxidative cell damage (Norenberg
et al. 2004, Hodgetts et al. 2009). Much of the damage is due to gluta-
et al. 2004). The oxidative damage occurs in many disorders ranging
from slow neurodegenerative diseases like amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis and Parkinson's disease to acute events like stroke and trauma.
Thus, each of the mechanisms of secondary damage has been focus
of intensive research (Young 1995).
SCI treatments focus on preventing the onset of edema, ischemia
and tissue destruction by applying different treatments in the early
period of trauma. Recent reports have claimed that hyperbaric
oxygen (HBO) treatment may be beneficial in acute and chronic SCI.
Although there are studies on the HBO treatment following SCI,
these are mainly histological studies or studies assessing neurological
function; studies on the effect of HBO on spinal cord tissue enzymemate excitotoxicity, Ca+2 overload and oxida
Paterson 1998). After SCI, inflammatory cells
oxidizing agents that attack the molecules cru
modify their chemical structure (Young 199
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +90 532 6860921; fax:
E-mail address: gulgun.kayalioglu@ege.edu.tr (G. Se
0024-3205/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All
doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2011.12.005functional recovery in the postoperative period.
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Catalase
Nitric oxide rat Key findings: In the preopHBO group, a significant decrease was observed in NOS and NO compared to the SCI
group. There was a decrease in SOD, NOS and NO in the postopHBO group when compared to the SCI group.
In the pre–postHBO group SOD, GPx, NOS and NO decreased significantly. There was a decrease in SOD in post-
opHBO compared to preopHBO. In the prepostopHBO, SOD decreased significantly compared to that in the pre-
opHBO group. The prepostopHBO presented a significant decrease in GPx compared to postopHBO (pb0.05 for
all parameters). No significant difference was observed for catalase for all groups. Significant improvement was
found in BBB scores for both postopHBO and prepostHBO groups when compared to the SCI group (pb0.05).
Significance: HBO treatment was found to be beneficial following SCI in terms of biochemical parameters andAims: Although hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) treatment following spinal cord injury (SCI) have been studied in
terms of neurological function and tissue histology, there is a limited number studies on spinal cord tissue
enzyme levels.
Main methods: The effect of HBO treatment in SCI was investigated by measuring superoxide dismutase (SOD),
catalase, glutathione peroxidase (GPx), nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and nitric oxide (NO) activity in the injured
tissue. SCI was induced by applying an aneurysm clip extradurally at the level of T9-T11 vertebrae. Preoperative
HBO (preopHBO) treatment was applied for 5 days and postoperative HBO (postopHBO) for 7 days.a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oThe effect of hyperbaric oxygen on neuror
cord injury
Kamil Dayan a, Aysegul Keser b, Sibel Konyalioglu c, M
Gulgun Sengul d,⁎, Taner Dagci b
a Izmir Bozyaka Training and Research Hospital, Department of Orthopedic and Trauma Su
b Ege University, School of Medicine Department of Physiology and Center For Brain Resear
c Ege University, School of Pharmacy, Department of Biochemistry, Izmir, Turkey
d Ege University, School of Medicine, Department of Anatomy, Izmir, Turkey
e Neoks, Center For Hyperbaric Treatment, Izmir, Turkey
j ourna l homepage: www.tive stress (Juurlink and
produce highly reactive
cial for cell function and
5, Liu et al. 1998, Vaziri
+90 232 3746597.
ngul).
rights reserved.eneration following acute thoracic spinal
te Erturk d, Figen Aydin e,
y Izmir, Turkey
Izmir, Turkey
ences
ev ie r .com/ locate / l i fesc ielevels is rather limited. There are only two reports published so far,
one by Kahraman et al. (2007) that measured thiobarbituric acid
reactive substance, superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase
(GPx) levels, and the other study is by Topuz et al. (2010)whomeasured
malondialdehyde, SOD, GPx and catalase levels.
In this study, we investigated the effect of HBO treatment in SCI by
measuring SOD, GPx, catalase, NO (nitric oxide) and nitric oxide
synthase (NOS)) enzyme activity in the injured spinal cord tissue.
361K. Dayan et al. / Life Sciences 90 (2012) 360–364Materials and methods
Forty-eight adult male Sprague–Dawley rats were used in total.
The experimental animals were divided into eight groups:
Group I : sham (control), n=6
Group II : spinal cord injury (SCI), n=6
Group III : sham+preoperative HBO (preopHBO), n=6
Group IV : SCI+preoperative HBO (preopHBO), n=6
Group V : sham+postoperative HBO (postopHBO), n=6
Group VI : SCI+postoperative HBO (postopHBO), n=6
Group VII : sham+preoperative+postoperative HBO (prepostHBO),
n=6
GroupVIII : SCI+preoperative and postoperative HBO (prepostHBO),
n=6
Rats were anesthetized intraperitoneally with combination of
50 mg/kg ketamine HCl, 5 mg/kg xylazine HCI and 1 mg/kg acepro-
mazine maleate. The back skin of the rats were shaved and disin-
fected with povidone-iodine solution. The skin, percutaneous tissues
and paravertebral muscle fascia were incised longitudinally in the
midline at the level of thoracic 9 (T9) to thoracic 11 (T11) vertebrae.
The muscles overlying the spine were stripped laterally with an ob-
tuse dissection. A bilateral laminectomy was performed to expose
the spinal cord and the clip compression injury model developed by
Rivlin and Tator (1978) was performed by applying an extradural
clip for 1 min (force of clip was 30 g). Sham groups were subjected
to laminectomy only. Postoperative cefazolin (30 mg/kg) was given
to prevent infection for five days.
The animals were handled under the prescriptions for animal care
and experimentation of the relevant European Communities Council
Directive (86/609/EEC) and all the procedures were approved by
the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey.
Preoperative HBO before SCI
Rats received HBO at 2.80 ATA 60 min daily for 5 days starting
from the fifth preoperative day. On the sixth day, all rats were operated
within 1 h and sacrificed on the first postoperative day.
Postoperative HBO after SCI
Following SCI, rats received HBO at 2.80 ATA for 60 min daily for
5 days starting from the first postoperative hour. All rats were sacri-
ficed on the eight postoperative day.
Preoperative + Postoperative HBO
Before SCI, rats received HBO at 2.80 ATA for 5 days starting from
the fifth preoperative day. Starting from the first postoperative hour,
the rats received HBO at 2.80 ATA for 60 min daily for 7 days and
were sacrificed on the eight postoperative day.
For all groups, rats were deeply anesthetized with 50 mg/kg keta-
mine and xylazine (5 mg/kg) and decapitated. A block of spinal cord
tissue extending from 2 cm proximal to 2 cm distal to the injury
was removed immediately after perfusion and snap frozen at 80 °C.
Enzyme activities of SOD, GPx, catalase, NO and NOS were mea-
sured for each rat. The SOD measurement level was performed on
the basis of the colorimetric determination of SOD's inhibition of the
color reaction given by the superoxide radical and the results were
expressed in U/mg. Catalase activity was measured using colorimetric
method based on the dismutation of H2O2 by catalase; absorbance
was read in a spectrophotometer at 240 nm according to the method
described by Aebi (1984). Oxidized glutathione that is formed by thereduction of organic peroxides by GPx is converted into its reduced
state through a reaction catalyzed by glutathione reductase. During
this conversion, the NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate) that is present in the environment is oxidized to NADP+
and reduced glutathione is synthesized with the transfer of liberated
hydrogen molecules to oxidized glutathione. In the course of these
reactions, a time-dependent reduction is observed in the absorbance
at 340 nm wavelength. The results were expressed as U/mg protein.
NOS concentration was determined using Griess reaction for the
colorimetric measurement of total nitrite, which is the final product
of NO− formed with the catalyzing role of NOS in aqueous solutions.
The results were expressed in nmol/ml/min. For the determination
of NO– levels, colorimetric method based on the addition of Griess
reagent on nitrite was used (Kobzik et al. 1994, Sun et al. 2003).
The results were expressed as μM/mg.
The motor function of rats was assessed using the BBB locomotor
rating scale (Basso et al., 1995).
Statistical analysis
SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Sciences) for Windows 17.0
was used for statistical analysis. Kruskal-Wallis test was used for the
comparison of quantitative data among three or more and Mann–
Whitney U test for comparing two experimental groups.
Results
Biochemical effects of HBO treatment
Rats with SCI showed a significant increase (pb0.05) in SOD, GPx,
NO− and NOS levels when compared to the laminectomy group. In
the preopHBO group, a significant decrease was observed in NOS
and NO levels when compared to the SCI group (pb0.05). Similarly,
there was a significant decrease in SOD, NOS and NO levels in the
postopHBO group when compared to the SCI group (pb0.05). In the
prepostopHBO group, SOD, GPx, NOS and NO levels decreased when
compared to the SCI group (pb0.05). The postopHBO group pre-
sented a significant decrease (pb0.05) in SOD levels when compared
to the preopHBOgroup. Therewas a significant decrease (pb0.05) in SOD
levels in the prepostopHBO group when compared to the preopHBO.
The prepostopHBO group showed a significant decrease in GPx levels
compared to the postopHBO group (pb0.05). There was a significant
decrease in GPx levels in the postopHBO group when compared to the
preopHBO group (Figs. 1, 2).
Functional effects of HBO treatment
When compared to the laminectomy group, the SCI group pre-
sented significantly lower BBB scores (pb0.05). There was an im-
provement in both postopHBO and prepostopHBO groups when
compared to the SCI group (pb0.05). No significant difference was
found in BBB scores between SCI and preopHBO groups and between
postopHBO and prepostopHBO groups (p>0.05) (Fig. 3).
Discussion
HBO treatment was first applied in SCI by Maeda (1965) who sug-
gested tissue ischemia resulted in hypoxia following SCI in dogs, and
HBO treatment at 2 ATA provided a dramatic increase in spinal cord
tissue oxygen levels. Hartzog et al. (1969) identified a reversal of
SCI following treatment at 3 ATA within the first 24 h. Yeo et al.
(1976) found that HBO treatment increased motor recovery and
decreased spinal degeneration when applied within 2 h following
injury and recovery of motor function was observed within the fol-
lowing 8 weeks. A reduction in spinal cord tissue cystic necrosis and
damage in the surrounding white matter following HBO treatment
Fig. 1. Levels of SOD, GPx and catalase in laminectomy, SCI, PreHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatment for 5 days followed by SCI), postHBO+SCI (SCI and postoperative HBO treat-
ment for 7 days) and Pre+PostHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatment for 5 days followed by SCI and postoperative HBO treatment for 7 days) groups (#pb0.01, *pb0.05).
362 K. Dayan et al. / Life Sciences 90 (2012) 360–364was also observed by Yeo et al. (1977). HBO reduced apoptosis fol-
lowing SCI (Calvert et al. 2006, Peng et al. 2008, Wang et al. 2009).
Higgins et al. (1981) studied spinal cord electropotentials and
showed that early HBO treatment contributed to the prevention of
progressive degeneration in SCI.
Neubauer andWalker (1998) found thatHBO treatment contributed
to regeneration in patients after omentum transposition and related
cell transplantation procedures following SCI. Al-Waili et al. (2005)
reported that HBO application is beneficial in patients with vascular
damage in the spinal cord. They suggested that the hemorrhage-
reducing effect of HBO treatment leads to a decrease in the amount of
environmental iron, which, in turn, reduces free radical formation.
Gelderd et al. (1983) showed that HBO treatment following SCI led to
less cavitation and better vascularized scars containing densely packed
collagen fibers. The use of HBO treatment in SCI is not limited to regen-
eration. Hart et al. (1984) found that HBO treatment led to an increase
in the exercise capacity of patients with SCI. Considering the fact that
most patients are paraplegic after SCI and they subsequently have reha-
bilitative needs, they benefit from HBO application.
In the present study, post-operative HBO treatment improved
neurological recovery significantly, based on BBB scores (pb0.05).
There was also a significant increase in SOD, GPx, NOS and NO− inFig. 2. Levels of NOS and NO in laminectomy, SCI, PreHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatmen
7 days) and Pre+PostHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatment for 5 days followed by SCI athe SCI group when compared to the laminectomy group (pb0.05).
However, no significant difference was found for catalase (p>0.05).
Tissue destruction secondary to ischemia leads to a rapid increase in
SOD levels and destroys the O2 radical. The emerging O2 radical
must be degraded to H2O2 by SOD enzyme. If this degradation does
not occur fast enough, it converts into OH−, the most dangerous
free radical in neural tissue, or the O² radical reacts with nitrogen
and leads to free nitrogen radicals (NOO−) formation. Then, the
emerging H2O2 is degraded to H2O with GPx or catalase, which uti-
lizes the same substrate. Similar to SOD values, we also found a signif-
icant increase in GPx levels, which indicates that the injury induced
free radical formation. Also, there was a more significant decrease in
NO− and NOS levels in the respective group when compared to con-
trols. Catalase utilizes H2O2 as does GPx, however, it requires a higher
substrate concentration. In this study, the significant increase in GPx
and the lack of such an increase in catalase were attributed to the
low substrate concentration.
Higgins et al. (1981) suggested that HBO treatment preserved the
seriously injured neurons of the long tracts of the spinal cord during the
early stages of traumatic SCI. HBO treatment increased arterial and cere-
brospinal fluid PO2 (Holbach et al. 1977). In the present study, when
compared to the only-SCI group, the SCI group that received HBOt for 5 days followed by SCI), postHBO+SCI (SCI and postoperative HBO treatment for
nd postoperative HBO treatment for 7 days) groups (*pb0.05).
days
per
363K. Dayan et al. / Life Sciences 90 (2012) 360–364treatment for 7 days postoperatively presented a significant decrease in
SOD, NOS and NO- levels (pb0.05). This indicates that HBO treatment
reduces the formation of free oxygen radicals to a significant extent.
There are a number of studies investigating the optimal duration
of HBO treatment. We chose the time frame for the treatment proto-
col as once daily and for 5 days pre-operatively and up to 7 days post-
operatively. This time frame was chosen because Schäbitz et al.
(2004) found that HBO treatment for 1 h starting from 2 h after stroke
onset is neuroprotective in rats and remains effective up to five days,
resulting in improved neurological outcome. Also, Hu et al. (2008)
found that HBO treatment for 5 days before traumatic brain injury
for 1 h protects brain tissue.
Huang et al. (2003) showed that when initiated 30 min after
ischemic injury HBO treatment had a protective effect in rabbits. HBO
treatment delayed for 6 h following ischemic injury however did not
change the prognosis. Huang et al. (2003) reported that single HBO
treatment within 3 h after ischemic injury or serial HBO applications
up to the sixth hour improvedmorphological and neurological recovery,
while single HBO treatment or serial HBO applications starting from the
24th hour were not effective. Consistently, in this study, we have found
that when compared to the only-SCI group, the groups that received
HBO before and after SCI showed significant decreases in SOD, GPx,
Fig. 3. BBB scores in laminectomy, SCI, PreHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatment for 5
Pre+PostHBO+SCI (preoperative HBO treatment for 5 days followed by SCI and postoNOS and NO levels (pb0.05). This decrease in enzyme levels, and the
significant decrease in GPx levels observed in the group that received
HBO pre- and postoperatively, but not in rats that received less HBO,
suggested that the effectiveness of HBO treatment increases with the
duration of treatment and longer applications were more effective.
We found a significant decrease in SOD levels was found in the SCI
group that received HBO postoperatively when compared to the SCI
group that received HBO preoperatively (pb0.05). This decrease in
SOD levels indicated that postoperative HBO application was more
effective than preoperative HBO application. Moreover, preoperative
HBO treatment in the SCI group was also more effective than the con-
trol group. The effect of HBO increased by orders of magnitude at the
postoperative stage and HBO treatment is especially more effective
under hypoxic conditions. When the SCI group that received HBO
preoperatively was compared to the SCI group that received HBO
both pre- and postoperatively, a significant decrease was observed
in SOD levels (pb0.05). This indicates that HBO treatment applied
after the injury and in multiple sessions is more effective. When the
SCI group that received HBO preoperatively was compared with the
SCI group that received HBO both pre- and postoperatively, a signifi-
cant decrease (pb0.05) was identified in GPx levels in both the pre-
and postoperative HBO group. The inverse proportion between thedecrease of GPx levels and the increase in the duration of HBO treat-
ment indicates that HBO mediates the elimination of O2 radicals in a
different manner than H2O2 conversion. The lack of any significant
differences in other parameters indicates that HBO is beneficial, but
not effective for all parameters. When the SCI group was compared
with the group that received HBO for 5 days preoperatively, inflicted
with SCI and sacrificed the following day, a significant decrease
(pb0.05) in NOS and NO levels was found in the HBO group. This
indicates that preoperative HBO treatment is beneficial for nervous
tissue regeneration, and NOS and NO are the first parameters to
change in the early period of neural injury. However, we did not
observe any positive effects of pre-operative HBO treatment on loco-
motor behavior, indicating that although pre-operative HBO treat-
ment before SCI may be beneficial, it is not effective enough to show
any behavioral improvement. Therefore, although some enzyme activ-
ities can be altered by pre-injury HBO may in the future lead to in-
sights to mechanism, it is incongruous to discuss pre-injury HBO as a
‘treatment’ in the context of SCI.
Kahraman et al. (2007) found that HBO administration following
SCI diminished SOD and GPx. They also found that HBO induced
ROS formation, which was not observed in our study. This may be
because they havemade theHBO treatment at a higher pressure (4ATA).
followed by SCI), postHBO+SCI (SCI and postoperative HBO treatment for 7 days) and
ative HBO treatment for 7 days) groups (*pb0.05).Topuz et al. (2010) combined HBO treatment with hypothermia in
rats with SCI and found a significant decrease in SOD, GPx and cata-
lase levels in the spinal cord tissue. We did not observe any difference
for catalase, presumably because GPx primarily degrades H2O2 due to
the low affinity of catalase enzyme to H2O2. Consistent with this
study, Yu et al. (2004) found a reduction in the number of iNOS im-
munoreactive neurons at 1 to 2 days after HBO treatment in rats
with SCI. Single HBO treatment produced a greater decrease than
the once a day HBO treatment at days two to four, suggesting early
HBO treatment effectively suppressed the progression of apoptosis
perhaps via the inhibition of iNOS.
Conclusion
HBO is found to be beneficial for neurological recovery when ap-
plied before and after SCI. The rats that received HBO before and
after SCI showed significant decreases in SOD, GPx, NOS and NO
levels. However, no significant difference was found among experi-
mental groups for catalase, indicating that the effect of HBO on cata-
lase levels may not be as beneficiary in SCI treatment; however,
further studies are needed to confirm this. Although the present
study confirms the efficacy of HBO in SCI in terms of neurological
and biochemical outcomes, the optimal number of applications needs
to be further investigated so that the effect of the treatment remains
constant.
Conflict of interest statement
None.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Ege University, School of Medicine
Research Fund (BAP 2009TIP039).
References
Aebi H. Catalase in vitro. Methods Enzymol. 1984;105:121–6.
Al-Waili Noori S, Butler GJ, Beale J, Abdullah MS, Hamilton RW, Lee BY, Lucus P, Allen
MW, Petrillo RL, Carrey Z, Finkelstein M. Hyperbaric oxygen in the treatment of pa-
tients with cerebral stroke, brain trauma, and neurologic disease. Adv Ther
2005;22(6):659–78.
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating scale for
open field testing in rats. J. Neurotrauma 1995;12:1-21.
Calvert JW, Cahill J, Yamaguchi-Okada M, Zhang JH. Oxygen treatment after experi-
mental hypoxia–ischemia in neonatal rats alters the expression of HIF-1alpha
and its downstream target genes. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006;101:853–65.
Gelderd JB, Fife WP, Bowers DE, Deschner SH, Welch DW. Spinal cord transection in
rats: the therapeutic effects of dimethyl sulfoxide and hyperbaric oxygen. Ann. N.
Y. Acad. Sci. 1983;411:218–33.
Hartzog JI, Fischer RG, Snow C. Spinal cord trauma: effects of hyperbaric oxygenation.
Proc. Ann. Clin. Spinal. Cord. Inj. Conf. 1969;17:70–1.
Juurlink BH, Paterson PG. Review of oxidative stress in brain and spinal cord injury:
suggestions for pharmacological and nutritional management strategies. J Spinal
Cord Med 1998;21(4):309–34.
Kahraman S, Düz B, Kayali H, Korkmaz A, Oter S, Aydin A, et al. Effects of methylpred-
nisolone and hyperbaric oxygen on oxidative status after experimental spinal cord
injury: a comparative study in rats. Neurochem. Res. 2007;32:1547–51.
Kobzik L, Reid MB, Bredt DS, Stamler JS. Nitric oxide in skeletal muscle. Nature
1994;372:546–8.
Liu J, Solway K, Messing RO, Sharp FR. Increased neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus after
transient global ischemia in gerbils. J Neurosci 1998;18(19):7768–78.
Maeda N. Experimental studies on the effect of decompression procedures and hyper-
baric oxygenation for the treatment of spinal cord injury. J. Natl. Med. Assoc.
1965;16:429–47.
Neubauer RA, Walker M. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy. New York: Avery Publications
Group; 1998.
Norenberg MD, Smith J, Marcillo A. The pathology of human spinal cord injury: defin-
ing the problems. J. Neurotrauma 2004;21:429–40.
Peng Z, Ren P, Kang Z, Du J, Lian Q, Liu Y, et al. Up-regulated HIF-1alpha is involved in
the hypoxic tolerance induced by hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning. Brain Res.
2008;1212:71–8.
Rivlin AS, Tator CH. Regional spinal cord blood flow in rats after severe cord trauma. J.
Neurosurg. 1978;49:844–53.
Schäbitz WR, Schade H, Heiland S, Kollmar R, Bardutzky J, Henninger N, et al. Neuro-
protection by hyperbaric oxygenation after experimental focal cerebral ischemia
monitored by MRI. Stroke 2004;35:1175–9.
Schwab ME, Bartholdi D. Degeneration and regeneration of axons in the lesioned spinal
cord. Physiol. Rev. 1996;76:319–70.
Sun J, Zhang X, Broderick M, Fein H. Measurement of nitric oxide production in biological
systems by using Griess reaction assay. Sensors 2003;3:276–84.
Topuz K, Colak A, Cemil B, Kutlay M, Demircan MN, Simsek H, et al. Combined hyper-
baric oxygen and hypothermia treatment on oxidative stress parameters after spinal
cord injury: an experimental study. Arch. Med. Res. 2010;41:506–12.
Vaziri ND, Lee YS, Lin CY, Lin VW, Sindhu RK. NAD(P)H oxidase, superoxide dismutase,
catalase, glutathione peroxidase and nitric oxide synthase expression in subacute
spinal cord injury. Brain Res 2004;995(1):76–83.
364 K. Dayan et al. / Life Sciences 90 (2012) 360–364baric oxygen therapy. J. Am. Paraplegia Soc. 1984;7:8–9.
Higgins AC, Pearlstein RD, Mullen JB, Nashold Jr BS. Effects of hyperbaric oxygen therapy
on long-tract neuronal conduction in the acute phase of spinal cord injury. J. Neuro-
surg. 1981;55:501–10.
Hodgetts SI, Plant GW, Harvey AR. Spinal cord injury: experimental animal models and
relation to human therapy. In: Watson C, Paxinos G, Kayalioglu G, editors. The
Spinal Cord: A Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation Text and Atlas. San
Diego: Academic Press Elsevier; 2009. p. 209–11.
Holbach KH, Wassmann H, Linke D. The use of hyperbaric oxygenation in the treatment
of spinal cord lesions. Eur. Neurol. 1977;16:213–21.
Hu SL, Hu R, Li F, Liu Z, Xia YZ, Cui GY, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning protects
against traumatic brain injury at high altitude. Acta Neurochir. Suppl. 2008;105:
191–6.
Huang L, Mehta MP, Nanda A, Zhang JH. The role of multiple hyperbaric oxygenation in
expanding therapeutic windows after acute spinal cord injury in rats. J. Neurosurg.
2003;99:198–205.Wang L, Li W, Kang Z, Liu Y, Deng X, Tao H, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning
attenuates early apoptosis after spinal cord ischemia in rats. J. Neurotrauma
2009;26:55–66.
Yeo JD, McKenzie B, Hindwood B, Kidman A. Treatment of paraplegic sheep with
hyperbaric oxygen. Med. J. Aust. 1976;1:538–40.
Yeo JD, Stabback S, McKenzie B. A study of the effects of hyperbaric oxygen on the
experimental spinal cord injury. Med. J. Aust. 1977;2:145–7.
Young W, Huang PP, Kume-Kick J. Cellular, ionic, and biomolecular mechanisms of the
injury process. In: Benzel ED, Tator CH, editors. Contemporary Management of Spi-
nal Cord Injury. Park Ridge, IL: American Association of Neurological Surgeons;
1995.
Yu Y, Matsuyama Y, YanaseM, Ito S, Adachi K, Satake K, et al. effects of hyperbaric oxygen
on GDNF expression and apoptosis in spinal cord injury. Neuroreport 2004;25:
2369–73.Hart GB, Strauss MB, Riker J. Vital capacity of quadriplegia patients treated with hyper-
