REVIEW
Recent therapeutic strategies for spinal cord injury
treatment: possible role of stem cells
D. Garbossa & M. Boido & M. Fontanella & C. Fronda &
A. Ducati & A. Vercelli
Received: 31 January 2011 /Revised: 27 September 2011 /Accepted: 20 November 2011 /Published online: 27 April 2012
# Springer-Verlag 2012
Abstract Spinal cord injury (SCI) often results in signifi-
cant dysfunction and disability. A series of treatments have
been proposed to prevent and overcome the formation of the
glial scar and inhibitory factors to axon regrowth. In the last
decade, cell therapy has emerged as a new tool for several
diseases of the nervous system. Stem cells act as minipumps
providing trophic and immunomodulatory factors to en-
hance axonal growth, to modulate the environment, and to
reduce neuroinflammation. This capability can be boosted
by genetical manipulation to deliver trophic molecules. Dif-
ferent types of stem cells have been tested, according to their
properties and the therapeutic aims. They differ from each
other for origin, developmental stage, stage of differentia-
tion, and fate lineage. Related to this, stem cells differenti-
ating into neurons could be used for cell replacement, even
though the feasibility that stem cells after transplantation in
the adult lesioned spinal cord can differentiate into neurons,
integrate within neural circuits, and emit axons reaching the
muscle is quite remote. The timing of cell therapy has been
variable, and may be summarized in the acute and chronic
phases of disease, when stem cells interact with a complete-
ly different environment. Even though further experimental
studies are needed to elucidate the mechanisms of action,
the therapeutic, and the side effects of cell therapy, several
clinical protocols have been tested or are under trial. Here,
we report the state-of-the-art of cell therapy in SCI, in terms
of feasibility, outcome, and side effects.
Keywords Spinal cord injury . Stem cells . Transplantation .
Regenerative approach . Cell replacement . Axonal
reorganization
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) often results in significant dysfunc-
tion and disability. It physically and psychologically affects
not only the individual but also his/her family and the whole
society. Worldwide SCI affects approximately six million
people, most often of young age; the chances of recovery are
very low and the disability is permanent, with long-lasting
deficits, such as partial or complete paralysis and loss of
sensation below the level of the injury. Early rehabilitation
in an organized multidisciplinary SCI care system lowers
mortality, decreases pressure sores, slightly increases chance
of neurologic recovery, and shortens lengths of stay, thus
reducing hospital charges. Nevertheless, continued func-
tional dependency, healthcare needs and costs, as well as
caregiver burden and stress often remain tremendous.
Functional deficits following SCI result from damage to
axon fibers, loss of neurons, activation of astrocytes and
microglia, and degeneration of oligodendrocytes [32] and
demyelination. The outcome is determined by the mechanical
insult, i.e., the primary damage, followed by several second-
ary processes as ischemia, anoxia, free-radical formation, and
excitotoxicity [56, 96].
The first mechanism of injury consists of traction and
compression forces. Compression by bone fragments or soft
D. Garbossa and M. Boido equally contributed to this article.
D. Garbossa (*) :M. Fontanella : C. Fronda :A. Ducati
Department of Neurosurgery, S. Giovanni Battista Hospital,
University of Torino,
Via Cherasco 15,
10126 Torino, Italy
e-mail: garbossa@libero.it
M. Boido :A. Vercelli
Department of Anatomy, Pharmacology and Forensic Medicine,
University of Torino,
Corso Massimo D’Azeglio 52,
10126 Torino, Italy
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
DOI 10.1007/s10143-012-0385-2
tissue injures both central and peripheral nervous structures.
Within minutes, the spinal cord swells and exceeds venous
pressure and results in secondary ischemia. The spinal neu-
rogenic shock leads to systemic hypotension that exacer-
bates the ischemia. Finally, the release of toxic molecules
leads to secondary damage [130]. The wave of secondary
cell death, which mainly affects neurons and oligodendro-
cytes, spreads rostrally and caudally from the site of impact,
leading to structural and functional damage. Key secondary
injury mechanisms include damage of spinal cord vasculature
and ischemia, glutamatergic excitotoxicity, oxidative cell
stress, lipid peroxidation, and inflammation, all of which
alone or in concert can stimulate apoptosis.
Toxic agents such as intracellular Ca++, free radicals, and
excitotoxic amino acids are responsible for triggering molec-
ular pathways leading to cell death, such as caspases andMAP
kinases, and inflammation. In addition, neutrophils and micro-
glial cells, stimulated by chemokines released at the lesion
area, migrate into the site of injury and cause enlargement of
the lesion area. The traumatic lesion is followed by the de-
generative changes of astroglia, oligodendroglia, and neurons
in and around the lesion site [105, 141, 224]. The outcome of
this sequence of events is the formation of the glial scar, a
cavity surrounded by reactive glia which represents a physical
obstacle to axonal regrowth [54, 148, 186, 224].
Inhibition of axonal growth
Highly vulnerable to insults, neurons and oligodendroglia
are spontaneously replaced after SCI to a very limited extent
due to restricted regenerative potential of endogenous neural
stem/progenitor cells. Furthermore, axonal regeneration and
remyelination, especially from mature neurons, are also
extremely limited if present at all. These disappointing
limitations can be ascribed to the presence of the glial scar,
neurotrophic factor deprivation, decreasing cyclic adenosine
monophosphate levels, inhibitory sulfated proteoglycans,
and inhibitory myelin-associated molecules. Formation of
the glial scar represents an attempt by glial cells to limit the
extent of the injury site and promote healing. Scar formation
involves oligodendrocyte precursor cells, microglia, macro-
phages, and extracellular matrix.
Besides the glial scar, there are other inhibitory obstacles to
axonal regeneration, such as myelin inhibitory molecules
including the myelin-associated neurite outgrowth inhibitor
Nogo-A, the myelin-associated glycoprotein, the proteogly-
cans brevican and versican V2, and several potentially repul-
sive/inhibitory axonal guidance molecules [129, 177]. After
injury, upregulation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
(CSPGs), which are associated with astrocyte and oligoden-
drocyte precursors, is a major contributor to the inhibitory
properties of the adult central nervous system (CNS).
Therefore, one major therapeutic aim is to modify the
extracellular matrix. In vitro experiments have demonstrated
that proteoglycans associated with reactive astrocytes can be
modified to increase axonal growth by removing or prevent-
ing the production of sugar epitopes on the proteoglycan
molecules [21, 64, 132, 133, 191]. An in vivo transgenic
model whose astrocytes express a CSPG-degrading enzyme
showed enhanced axonal growth after injury [26]. Neutral-
izing a heparan/chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan expressed
after brain injury with a blocking antibody allows neurite
outgrowth and prevents growth cone collapse in vitro [20].
Injured corticospinal fibers and uninjured serotonergic
fibers increase sprouting after enzymatic treatment to re-
move sugar epitopes [10], and in vivo studies have revealed
remarkable long-distance regeneration of adult axons
though CNS white matter tracts after enzymatic treatment
to digest these proteoglycan side chains [191].
Timing of transplantation
The success of any treatment seems strictly dependent on the
timing of SCI therapy. In fact, the therapeutic time window in
which the spinal microenvironment is not compromised is
very narrow [55, 72].
After the initial injury, the damage site expands from the
injury epicenter, i.e., many centimeters in a human. Analysis
of chronic SCI shows that, typically, portions of the outer
white matter are spared, while there is extensive damage of
the inner grey matter. Within white matter, both ascending
and descending axons degenerate, and demyelination occurs
due to loss of oligodendrocytes. Chronic, progressive de-
myelination is a persistent feature of SCI [203]. The astro-
cyte response begins immediately after injury (proliferation,
hypertrophy, etc.) and evolves over time. Reactive astro-
cytes produce extracellular matrix components such as
chondroitin and keratan sulfate proteoglycans. Ultimately,
a scar-encapsulated cavity many times the size of the initial
injury forms [54, 186].
The occurring cellular events are characterized by the
time-dependent expression of specific molecules, such as
the early activation of inflammatory cytokines (interleukin-1
alpha and interleukin-1 beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha,
and interleukin-6), and the glial cyst and scar formation in
the following days [147]. The weeks before the complete
formation of the glial scar may offer a potential temporal
opportunity to facilitate and maximize benefit from endog-
enous or transplanted stem cells. This is thought to be the
interval whereby stem cells can achieve maximum repair in
the injured CNS.
Therefore, SCI involves different phenomena, which
have a specific chronology summarized in acute and chronic
phases. Consequently, stem cell transplantation occurring at
294 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
different time intervals from the injury may interact with
different mechanisms of damage or repair. Transplantation
in the acute phase occurs before the formation of the glial
scar and cyst, and also modulates the early phases of micro-
glia activation and astrogliosis. On the other hand, since it is
quite often difficult to foresee the outcome of an injury in
the acute phase, the lesion must be stabilized before invasive
treatment. Transplantation in the chronic phase could give
new hopes to people who are functionally impaired since
months or years: in fact, several authors have demonstrated
the stem cell ability to fill the lesion cavity and eventually to
bridge the gap on the lesion area (Fig. 1a) [141].
Experimental models of SCI
Treatment for SCI in patients still remains limited to the
reduction of the lesion and to the control of inflammation
and of glial activation [4, 49, 53]. Even though this approach
has been questioned, cortisone remains the elective treatment
in many countries, such as Italy. Most of the studies involving
new therapeutic strategies, and in particular those involving
stem cell therapy, undergo a preclinical phase. To this aim, the
major challenge consists in creating a reproducible experi-
mental model which can mimic the human pathology. Actu-
ally, two models in mice and rats are commonly used in
studies on SCI treatment: the compression and the transection
models. The first one is quite adherent to the SCI due to
trauma, and is the most relevant for human SCI. However,
the spared axons and regenerating axons in the injured spinal
cord are not easy to distinguish [197]. Specific devices have
been used to create reproducible SCI compression lesions,
such as the IH device (Precision Systems and Instrumentation
LLC) [172] or the 23-g clip (Walsh) [90]. On the other hand,
unilateral [45] or bilateral [164] transection of the dorsolateral
funiculus in rodents allows to study axon regeneration and
sprouting while reducing the role of the glial cyst. In particu-
lar, unilateral transection allows to study axonal sprouting
from the contralateral side and the effects of stem cell trans-
plantation [19]. In any case, it must be considered that there
are consistent differences in the anatomy of the descending
pathways controlling movement between humans and rodents
[176].
In order to assess the outcome of treatment in preclinical
studies, a general consensus must be achieved on the param-
eters to consider. First of all, a battery of behavioral tests is
currently used for testing the improvement of motor perfor-
mance following treatment in terms of muscular strength,
resistance, and coordination [180]. Nevertheless, it must be
considered that in rodents, the relevance of intrinsic spinal
circuits is much higher than in primates [169]. Second, the
morphological outcome includes a series of parameters rel-
ative to (1) fiber sprouting [number of myelinated fibers in
Fig. 1 a After compression injury and transplantation, neural precur-
sors (in green) are able to fill the lesion cavity, here well highlighted by
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostaining (in red). b In
vitro neural precursor display heterogeneous morphology, frequently
showing more or less elongated processes. c Also in vivo, when
transplanted 2 weeks after hemisection injury, NPs are distributed in
clusters, display variable aspect, and emit processes of different lengths
directed caudally and laterally with synaptic boutons in contact with
local neurons (labeled in red labeled with anti-5HT antibody). Scale
bar0200 μm in a, 50 μm in b, and 100 μm in c
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 295
the white matter, of growth associated protein 43, or 5HT
(serotonin)-positive fibers], (2) glial activation (microglial
activation and astrogliosis), and (3) glial scar and cyst size
[4, 18, 19, 88, 104].
Treatments that promote recovery following SCI
The limited spontaneous regeneration and regrowth of the
proximal segment of the injured spinal cord represents an
important target for research. Treatments should act on both
on the intrinsic neuronal mechanisms and on extracellular
matrix (ECM), and on non-neuronal cells located beyond
the lesion, especially neutrophils and microglia. On the
extrinsic side, the ECM is responsible for the formation
and stabilization of perineuronal nets and matrix networks
containing potent growth inhibitory molecules, such as
CSPGs. Interventions that have been combined with trans-
plants to promote repair and/or recovery include the appli-
cation of neurotrophic or growth factors, pharmacological
agents that mimic the action of neurotransmitters, antiapop-
totic agents, agents that interfere with axonal growth inhib-
itors, and physical rehabilitation and training [56, 105, 178].
Most treatments are devoted to cure acute injury, whereas
chronic injury is a more challenging condition. Recent advan-
ces in stem cell biology have provided new tools in therapeu-
tic strategies in neurodegenerative diseases and injury, aiming
both to cell replacement and trophic support.
Potential approaches aim to optimize functional recovery
after SCI. They include minimizing the progression of sec-
ondary injury, manipulating the neuroinhibitory environment
of the spinal cord, replacing lost tissue with transplanted cells
or peripheral nerve grafts, remyelinating denuded axons, and
maximizing the intrinsic regenerative potential of endogenous
progenitor cells. Their primary goal has been to replace lost
cells [148]. While early studies transplanted differentiated
neural cells and glia, more recent studies have proposed
transplantation of stem cells or unrestricted progenitors, com-
mitted to the neural lineage (Fig. 1b). These cells have a
remarkable ability to differentiate into appropriate cells by
taking cues from their close environment. Moreover, trans-
planted cells can provide molecules, such as neurotrophic
factors, supporting nervous system regeneration.
The issue of stem cell research is politically and ethically
charged. As a result, stem cell technology is imbued in an
ethical conflict between human embryo research raising
moral concerns on one hand, and the magnitude of the
potential benefits to patients, on the other. Stem cells may
be derived from a variety of sources, including early em-
bryos, fetal tissue, and some adult tissues (e.g., bone marrow
and blood).
This review reports the state-of-the-art of cell therapy in
SCI. First, the limit to regeneration present in the injury site,
as well as the issues involved in cell sourcing, is detailed.
Next, the different types of cell therapy are defined with the
benefits and drawbacks of each type given. Methods for
delivering cells are also discussed. Finally, suggestions are
made for future work in developing therapies for SCI.
Recent advances in neural injury and repair, and the prog-
ress towards development of neuroprotective and regenera-
tive interventions are discussed.
Regenerative approach versus cell replacement
strategies
Spinal cord repair consists in axonal regeneration, in the
restoration of former neural circuits, and eventually in the
formation of new ones. Cell-based approaches for spinal cord
functional repair center on two fundamental directions that are
not mutually exclusive: restitution of white matter long tracts
(“regenerative” approaches) and cell (i.e., neuronal or oligo-
dendrocyte) replacement [54, 87, 186] (Fig. 2). The chal-
lenges to obtain functional recovery are the following: (1)
cell survival or replacement, (2) axon regeneration or growth,
(3) correct targeting by growing axons, and (4) establishment
of correct and functional synaptic connections. The solutions
proposed include intraspinal transplants with fetal cells or
progenitor cells to restore the intraspinal circuitry or to func-
tion as relays for damaged axons. The physiologically dis-
rupted but anatomically preserved axons can be remyelinated
by Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes, and olfactory ensheath-
ing cells (OECs) transplantation.
When cell replacement is considered, stem cells can
differentiate into neurons and form new circuits eventually
bridging the gap on the lesion area. Nevertheless, the loss of
neurons contributes only minimally to the functional deficits
in SCI, as only neurons at the injured segmental level are
lost. Cell-based therapies can substitute lost glial cells to
some extent and provide growth-promoting factors; howev-
er, structural and functional recovery is moderate at best
[166]. Ideally, cell candidates for transplantation should be
able to replace the function of astrocytes, which build the
cellular scaffold of the spinal cord and provide guidance
cues for regenerating axons and oligodendrocytes, which
myelinate axons, thus allowing proper nerve conduction
[33, 178]. We have recently obtained a good integration of
neural precursors collected from the spinal cord of embry-
onic day 12 (E12) mice into the lesioned spinal cord of the
adult mouse, with the elongation of axons through several
neuromers, emitting segmental collaterals [18] (Fig. 1c).
Regarding the bystander role, it has been shown that
different types of stem cells can produce and release in the
environment trophic factors and immunomodulatory mole-
cules [209]. Various cell types such as fibroblasts, Schwann
cells, and OECs have been analyzed for their regenerative
296 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
potential after transplantation into the injured spinal cord
[16, 53, 200, 208]. Successful axon regeneration requires
that injured neurons activate a specific gene program, which
includes activation of regulatory genes and growth-
associated proteins needed to sustain the elongation of the
axon stem. The expression of these genes is modulated by
extrinsic signals issued by different sources. On one hand,
intrinsic neuronal properties are influenced by molecular
cues present in the axonal microenvironment. On the other
hand, there is increasing evidence that interaction with the
external world through sensory stimulation or physical ex-
ercise also exerts a strong modulatory effect on neuritic
growth and plasticity. Therefore, the growth potential of
injured neurons (but also of their uninjured counterparts that
may contribute to repair through circuit reorganization)
depends on the interaction between intrinsic neuronal prop-
erties, environmental regulatory molecules, and experience-
related mechanisms.
Cell replacement [113] can be achieved by transplanting
stem cells either differentiated in vitro [94], or naïve, expected
to differentiate in vivo [15]. Undifferentiated cells, however,
may aim to replace different cell types such as glia as well as
neurons. In addition to undifferentiated or progenitor neural
stem cells, many different cell types such as genetically mod-
ified fibroblasts, OECs, and Schwann cells have been used to
promote axonal regeneration [109, 115, 200, 205, 224]. Func-
tional recovery has been obtained in experimental models of
SCI following transplantation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
[129], mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), neural stem cells
(NSCs), and glia restricted precursor cells [18, 29, 44, 76,
83, 89, 92, 129, 146, 200].
Embryonic stem cell transplantation
ESCs have the broadest potential of any true stem cell. ESCs
are isolated from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst [62,
131, 220], derived through in vitro fertilization [52, 126,
183]. They (a) can replicate indefinitely without aging; (b)
are pluripotent; i.e., can give rise to all the different types of
cells in the body; (c) give rise to genetically normal cells;
and (d) can be easily manipulated genetically [110]. ESCs
can be differentiated in vitro before transplantation: culture
in media containing Vitronectin and retinoic acid, Sonic
hedgehog, Noggin, or SB431542 can promote oligodendro-
cyte differentiation [57]. Therefore, ESCs can differentiate
into functional neurons [13, 60, 95, 114, 118, 229], which
integrate in vivo into host circuits as shown electrophysio-
logically after transplantation [24, 71, 215]. In addition, they
are able to differentiate into glia [23, 174], such as oligo-
dendrocytes, capable of rapid differentiation and myelina-
tion in mixed neuron/glial cell culture [98, 101] and which
remyelinate and promote regeneration in the injured axons
in SCI [131] and functional recovery [61, 106, 144, 166].
On the other hand, ESCs have an intrinsic potential to give
origin to teratomas after transplantation [15, 31, 173], even
after fluorescent-activated cell sorting [35, 199, 214] during
or after differentiation to purify the neural cells. Moreover,
they can give rise to normal cells in the wrong place.
Fig. 2 Regenerative approach versus cell replacement strategy. Fol-
lowing an injury, spinal cord regeneration can be supported by stem
cell transplantation. In particular, stem cells can stimulate a regenera-
tive process, by delivering trophic factors (yellow dots) and immuno-
modulatory molecules (green triangles), which can enhance axon
sprouting [see host surviving motoneurons (pink) with axonal growth
cones]. Alternatively, stem cells can differentiate into neurons (N) and
integrate into the host circuits, emitting axons able to bridge the lesion
gap; moreover, they can integrate the remaining functional glia, for
example, differentiating into astrocytes (A), or they may remain as
undifferentiated precursors (P)
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 297
Therefore, before transplanting ESC-derived cells, it is crit-
ical to get rid of undifferentiated pluripotent cells, to gain
control of ESCs, and to guide their differentiation toward
the neural lineage. Elimination of pluripotent cells has been
convincingly obtained by spontaneous differentiation of
ESCs cultured at low density, followed by propagation as
a monolayer in epidermal growth factor (EGF) and basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) [38]. ESCs in the presence
of appropriate signaling molecules can be maintained as a
relatively homogeneous population of stem cells. Prolonged
differentiation protocols [22] or inhibition of proliferation
signaling pathways by genetic manipulation [111] decreases
the incidence of tumor formation. ESC-derived tumor for-
mation can be also prevented by co-transplantation with
BMSCs [127].
Stem cells of neural origin
NSCs can be isolated from many regions of the CNS of
embryonic as well as adult mammals [79], and propagated
in culture in the presence of EGF and/or bFGF as neuro-
spheres. Neurospheres, differently to ESCs, represent hetero-
geneous clusters of proliferating cells including stem cells,
committed progenitors, and differentiated cells [1]. NSCs also
seem to be restricted in the variety of neurons they can
generate. In fact, NSCs did not give rise to motoneurons,
whereas they could be successfully differentiated into cortical
projection neurons [50], interneurons [175], and hippocampal
pyramidal neurons [39]. Differentiated NSCs fully integrated
into the host circuits, since they could be retrogradely labeled
from the axon terminals, formed synaptic contacts, and gen-
erated action potentials in vivo [50]. In addition to be able to
differentiate into neurons [93, 189], they can differentiate into
glial cells, such as astrocytes [51, 75, 219] and oligodendro-
cytes [155, 226], and endothelial cells [223]. NSCs can protect
against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity and secrete GDNF
and NGF (nerve growth factor), thus promoting survival of
injured motoneurons [117]. Embryonic neural precursors can
integrate into host-damaged tissue, differentiate into neurons,
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, and promote regeneration
and repair [69, 107], enhancing sprouting of serotonergic
and noradrenergic fibers [18, 137].
Organotypic cell replacement can be achieved with neu-
ral precursors cells (NPCs). NPCs from embryonic as well
as adult CNS tissue have the capacity for self-renewal and
multipotency [162, 193]. After delayed transplantation of
embryonic-derived NPCs into the injured rat spinal cord,
differentiation into glial and neuronal lineages as well as
modest functional improvement have been reported [68,
129, 200]. Even though NSCs display a lower tumorigenic
risk than ESCs, it has been reported at least in one case that
they can give rise to brain tumor [6].
Transplantation of neural stem cells and progenitors
entails ethical concerns, limited availability, and need for
immunosuppression in the host, which can be avoided by
the isolation and expansion of autologous adult NPCs. Au-
tologous adult NPCs transplanted into the intact spinal cord
of adult rats survive, migrate over considerable distances,
and differentiate into astroglial and oligodendroglial cells
[184]. Subventricular zone-derived adult NPCs survive after
delayed transplantation—at least 7 days post-injury—into the
spinal cord parenchyma surrounding the injury site [28].
Acutely injured spine area is an inhospitable CNS environ-
ment for any cell graft, due to the release of inflammatory
molecules and the upregulation of mediators of cell death/
degeneration and secondary ischemic events. It has been
proposed that neurospheres can survive in the host better than
single cell suspensions, since cell–cell contacts remain intact
and detrimental effects by dissociation methods are avoided
[194]. Adult NPCs transplanted into the fluid-filled lesion
cavity (cyst) fail to produce extracellular matrix needed to
survive [129]. On the other hand, adult NPCs migrate and
align along injured axon pathways caudal and rostral to the
lesion site, suggesting that they are not sealed off by the
surrounding host spinal cord, in contrast to other cell types
such as fibroblasts or Schwann cells [28, 34, 49, 63, 67].
Remyelination of host axons by neural stem cells may be
one mechanism generating functional recovery [116]; more-
over, stem cells can also promote regeneration, enhancing
sprouting of descending fibers [18]. Peripheral nervous sys-
tem (PNS) myelinating Schwann cells derived from neural
crest-like skin-derived precursors, used for autologous graft,
transplanted into the injured rat spinal cord, reduced contusion
cavity size, myelinated endogenous host axons, recruited en-
dogenous stem cells, provided a bridge across the lesion site,
increased the size of spared tissue rim, reduced reactive glio-
sis, and generated an environment highly permissive to axonal
growth [150, 151]. Transplantation of Schwann cells results in
a strong integration in the host tissue with anatomical and
functional improvement, excepted when transplanted directly
into lesion cavity, where they show poor survival rate [49].
OECs surround olfactory axons and facilitate their life-
long regeneration. They are attractive for their plasticity and
allow axons to cross glial scars as well as the PNS–CNS
boundary. OECs can stimulate tissue repair and neuropro-
tection, enhance axonal regeneration and remyelination,
activate angiogenesis, and influence the endogenous glia
after lesion [163], even though there are contrasting reports
probably due to the changes in their biological properties
with increasing age and/or passage number. A recent study
on seven patients receiving autologous OECs into the lesion
site after chronic SCI demonstrated a variable extent of
functional recovery, as far as restoration of bladder sensa-
tion, voluntary anal sphincter contraction, and improved
motor and sensory function to variable extent [157].
298 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
Bone marrow-derived cells
Adult bone marrow is easily accessible, containing both
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and bone marrow MSCs,
and their usage does not imply the ethical concerns associ-
ated with ES cells. In fact, they can be collected from the
patient himself or from donors following informed consent.
Rodent HSCs transplanted into mice with compression
SCI generate oligodendrocytes, resulting in significant func-
tional recovery of hindlimb function and general locomotion
[3]. As neural differentiation of HSCs is controversial, they
are thought to impart beneficial neuroprotective and/or immu-
nomodulatory effects by releasing growth or anti-inflammatory
factors [40, 145, 190].
Azizi et al. [7] infused rat brains with human marrow
stromal cells/MSCs, capable of expansion, self-renewal, and
differentiation into several different cell lineages. Their mi-
gration into the brain resembles that of paraventricular astro-
cytes, but whether the cells adopt neural cell fates remains
uncertain. Several studies have suggested that MSCs, like
bone marrow mononuclear cells and umbilical cord cells,
may generate neurons both in vitro and in vivo. Nevertheless,
these conclusions have been drawn mostly on morphological
criteria in vitro [46, 221] and in vivo on studies employing
transferable labels [100, 140, 185], without electrophysiolog-
ical evidence [122]. Therefore, these studies have been chal-
lenged [25, 41, 121, 195]. More recently, the appearance of
neuronal-like MSCs has been ascribed to a process of cell
fusion rather than that of transdifferentiation [222]. Neverthe-
less, cell fusion is probably very rare, and the acquisition of
neural antigens by MSCs might simply reflect their extreme
immaturity and their undetermined fate [47, 70, 122].
On the other hand, MSCs, which are currently used in
association with HSCs in order to decrease immunoreaction
in the host, have an anti-inflammatory potential, i.e., de-
crease microglia and astroglia activation, and their usage in
diseases of the nervous system has a positive functional
outcome [70, 143]. Recently, MSCs have been transplanted
into the injured spinal cord, either embedded in a polymer or
by lumbar puncture, associated with neurotrophic factor
such as IL-6, brain-derived growth factor (BDNF), NGF,
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and
neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) [42, 81, 103, 108, 122, 135, 142,
167, 207], with promising results in terms of functional
outcome [8, 99, 210, 217]. MSCs probably display their
action by modulating inflammatory response to the insult
and providing trophic factors for neurons and regenerating
fibers. Transplantation and intravenous injection of bone
marrow cells, and especially MSCs, has been repeatedly
shown to significantly improve locomotion and hindlimb
sensitivity after contusion, hemisection, and compression
SCI in mice and rats compared with controls, with an
increase in spared white matter in treated animals. The
mechanisms of action underlying these benefits are only
beginning to be understood [218].
In our experience, MSCs were able to survive for a long
time into the injured spinal cord, promoting sprouting of
raphespinal axons and functional recovery of motor behav-
ior, probably acting as biologic minipumps able to deliver
trophic factors and immunomodulatory molecules [18]. Fur-
thermore, such ability could be exploited by transfecting
MSCs to produce and release constantly neurotrophic fac-
tors, thus providing a continuous and in loco source with
neuroprotective effects [9, 70, 153].
MSCs migrate toward injury-associated signals in vitro,
attracted by cytokines and chemokines [136, 156, 188]. Not-
withstanding the rather poor survival of MSCs following
transplantation into the brain [41], endovenous administration
of MSCs lead to significant functional improvement in a
cerebral ischemia model [78], making unclear their mecha-
nism of action. Nevertheless, the therapeutic potential of
MSCs is currently being investigated in several clinical trials
for neural diseases [58]. To this aim, accurate pre-
transplantation analyses should be carried such as demonstra-
tion of a normal karyotype. In fact, even though MSCs are
thought to be potentially free from side effects, malignant
transformation has been found after extended culture in vitro
both for mouse [138, 202] and human [170, 182]. Their
uncontrolled proliferation could be further supported in vivo
by their immunosuppressive properties [48, 171, 233].
Another bone marrow-derived stem cell population,
called multipotent adult progenitor cells (MAPCs), has been
described displaying greater potential than MSCs [84, 161].
In vitro MAPCs can give rise to functional cell types from
the three embryonic germ layers, including functional neu-
ronal cells [168, 179, 181, 228]. Zhao et al. [232] have
employed MAPCs in a rodent model of stroke, showing a
behavioral function improvement, even if there is no evi-
dence for their neural differentiation in vivo [25].
In conclusion, bone marrow-derived cells have been the
focus of a significant debate in stem cell biology pertaining
to whether stem cells can transdifferentiate. Some studies
have shown MSC differentiation to oligodendrocytes after
implantation, whereas others demonstrated the cells only to
localize to Schwann and oligodendrocyte cells post-
transplantation. Other studies detected no transdifferentia-
tion, even though functional improvement was noted. In
vivo differentiation to highly pure neural populations has
not been clearly documented; however, some ex vivo bone
marrow-derived cells have been shown to express neuronal
and oligodendroglial markers [9, 218].
Ex vivo transdifferentiated cells
A recent innovative approach in regenerative medicine is
represented by ex vivo transdifferentiated cells, consisting in
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 299
reprogramming somatic cells (e.g., fibroblasts) by inserting
some transcription factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and
MYC), thus obtaining the so-called induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs). These factors play a specific role in
maintaining cellular pluripotency, assuring the typical mor-
phology, growth properties, and genetic features of ESCs,
and allowing the differentiation into endoderm, mesoderm,
and ectoderm germ layers [196].
Moreover, there are both advantages and disadvantages
relative to iPSCs: in fact, their use circumvents many ethical
issues generally related to ESCs, but similarly to ESCs, they
can cause teratomas, specific embryonic tumors composed
by different cell types [111]. Indeed, this problem is related
to their pluripotency; therefore, the aim is now to induce a
partial cell commitment: new techniques allow to reduce the
number of employed transcriptional factors and chemicals,
generating partially reprogrammed iPSCs able to self-renew
and differentiate into specific cell lineages, or aberrantly
reprogrammed cells that can only self-renew [225].
A valid alternative consists in differentiating in vitro
iPSCs into neural precursors, successfully obtaining neurons
and glial cells: when transplanted in the murine brain, iPSCs
gave rise to glutamatergic, GABAergic, and catecholamin-
ergic neurons [216]: in addition, to limit the teratoma for-
mation, authors have separated the undifferentiated cells,
representing a limited contaminating population, from com-
mitted neural cells.
Hence, before using iPSCs in clinical trials, it is funda-
mental to evaluate their safety and their efficacy. Tsuji et al.
[204] have already transplanted neurospheres obtained from
iPSCs into injured murine spinal cords, showing a consis-
tent functional recovery due to remyelination and serotonin-
ergic fiber regrowth.
Finally, a consistent advantage from iPSC use consists in
that cells can be obtained directly from patients and expanded,
eliminating graft rejection problems.
Co-transplantation of different stem cell types
As mentioned, every stem cell type entails both advantages
and disadvantages: ESCs, even though totipotent, imply
ethical problems and can give rise to tumors; on the other
hand, adult stem cells are easily obtained from many tissues
and are safe (e.g., MSCs are already employed in several
clinical trials for hematological pathologies, heart/vascular
diseases, osteogenesis imperfecta, and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis), even though they are more restricted in their
differentiation potential than ESCs [59, 65].
A promising approach can consist in co-transplanting dif-
ferent stem cell types: in fact, some authors have already
demonstrated the synergistic effects obtained by combined
graft of stem cells. For example, Zhang et al. [231] co-
transplanted in a rat-transected spinal cord NSCs and
Schwann cells transfected with adenoviral vectors carrying
human NT-3, observing functional recovery due to axonal
regeneration, remyelination, and neuron survival. Similarly,
Wang et al. [213] have employed a stem cell cocktail (NSCs
and OECs) in a rat-injured spinal cord, obtaining locomotor
recovery, and NSC differentiation into neural cells and the
regeneration of nerve fibers crossing the lesion site from
OECs. Therefore, co-transplanted stem cells have a synergis-
tic effect, mutually acting on neural regeneration and on
behavioral recovery: indeed, co-transplantation seems more
effective than a single cell type graft. It is also possible to
exploit the MSC characteristics, in terms of homing, delivery
of trophic factors, immunosuppressive properties, to enhance
the integration of other stem cells, such as neural/embryonic
stem cells into the injured CNS.
Recently, MSCs have been injected with embryonic-
derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) in dysmye-
linated mice, obtaining the enhancement of OPC survival
and their oligodendroglial maturation, in addition to modu-
lating neuroinflammation [43].
Proteomics of stem cells
Due to their enormous potential, stem cells are investigated
in many molecular profiling studies in order to find new
markers and regulatory pathways governing their self-
renewal and differentiation. Neuroproteomics represents
the most recent approach to study the nervous system pro-
teome: in fact, techniques like microarrays, two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis, mass spectrometry, and protein arrays
for proteomic analysis allow to monitor the changes in gene
or protein expression of a variety of different molecules
[11].
First of all, gene expression profiling stem cells at differ-
ent stages of differentiation is very important to define and
characterize the cells which are harvested, cultured, expand-
ed, and finally transplanted. Some “stemness” genes specif-
ically expressed in ES cells and involved in maintaining
pluripotency and self-renewal, such as Oct-3/4, Sox-2, and
UTF-1, can be identified [14]. On the other hand, Wang and
Gao [211] identified 23 proteins with changing expression
levels or phosphorylation states after neural differentiation
of murine ESCs: in particular, translationally controlled
tumor protein (TCTP) is downregulated and alpha-tubulin
upregulated, suggesting a role of TCTP in modulating neu-
ral differentiation through binding to Ca(2+), tubulin, and
Na,K-ATPase. Differentiation of fetal NSCs into neural cells
is accompanied by changes in the expression of proteins
involved in DNA and RNA binding (hnRNPs A1, A2/B,
and H), iron storage (Ferritin L subunit), redox regulation
(Protein DJ-1), mRNA processing, and transport (hnRNPH
and hnRNP A1) [187]. Seven proteins increase their
300 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
expression, and one (HS90B, a tumor-specific transplanta-
tion antigen) decreases in the transition from ES cells to NS
cells, whereas eight decrease their expression from NS cells
to neurons [2]: therefore, protein synthesis and folding,
oxidoreduction, signal transduction, and changes in the cy-
toskeleton are upregulated in the transition from ES cells to
NS cells, and protein synthesis and folding, oxidoreduction,
and signal transduction are downregulated in that from NS
cells to neurons.
Proteomics can represent a resource for the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases. Transplanted stem cells and the
injured environment following ischemia or nerve injury can
be analyzed by (1) studying the expression of growth and
neurotrophic factors secreted at the injury site, such as
insulin growth factor-1, VEGF-A, transforming growth
factor-beta1, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, stromal de-
rived factor-1 alpha, and NGF; and (2) evaluating the pos-
sible interaction between stem cells and the environment
[30, 42].
Stem cells, either constitutionally or upon stimulation by
the injured environment, can change their pattern of expres-
sion and secrete neurotrophic and/or immunomodulatory
molecules. MSCs display immunological, reparative, and
anti-inflammatory properties, making them a promising tool
in approaches of regenerative cell therapy. MSCs are able to
secrete several bioactive molecules with trophic (stem cell
factor SCF, leukemia inhibitory factor LIF, macrophage
colony-stimulating factor M-CSF, NGF, and NT-3), immu-
nomodulatory (prostaglandin E2 PGE-2, transforming
growth factor-beta1 TGF-β1, and LIF), anti-apoptotic, and
angiogenetic (VEGF, bFGF, interleukin 6 IL-6, and insulin-
like growth factor-1 IGF-1) properties, fundamental in lead-
ing to tissue repair at sites of injury [122, 125, 134, 142]. In
a microarray study, the global transcriptional profile of
mouse MSCs puts in evidence secreted proteins that play a
role within the HSC niche such as fibronectin-1 (Fn1),
osteopontin (Spp1), chemokine C-X-C motif ligand-12
(Cxcl12), thrombospondin-1 (Thbs1), thrombospondin-2
(Thbs2), transforming growth factor-β2 (Tgfb2),
angiopoietin-1 (Angpt1), insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-4 (Igfbp4), fibroblast growth factor-7 (Fgf7), secret-
ed frizzled-related protein-1 (Sfrp1), secreted frizzled-
related protein-2 (Sfrp2), dickkopf-3 (Dkk3), vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (Vcam1), and bone morphogenetic
protein receptor type 1a (Bmpr1a) [154]. Therefore, MSCs
express a variety of genes, some of which they share with
other cell types, and some are specific. The result is the
expression of a cocktail of proteins that can modulate im-
mune system, modulate microglia activation and astroglio-
sis, and provide trophic support for neuron survival and
axonal growth.
Neuroprotection can be provided also by neural stem/
progenitor cells: they can interfere with production of free
radicals and increase the expression of neuroprotective fac-
tors by secretion of ciliary neurotrophic factor and VEGF
[123, 128]. Neural stem cells show also immunomodulatory
potential, determining a bystander inhibitory effect on T cell
activation and proliferation in lymph nodes [12].
Finally, embryonic stem cells are able to deliver several
factors (hepatocyte growth factor, TGF beta, and BDNF) that
can act both locally and systemically, promoting biological
repair and regeneration; moreover, when transplanted, they
can establish synergistic interactions with endogenous adult
stem cells, enhancing in this way tissue regeneration [74, 117,
119, 230].
Indeed, the study of the reciprocal influences of the
lesioned environment and the transplanted stem cells at a
proteomic level is drawing an increasing interest: the func-
tional roles of neuroproteoma can represent a powerful tool
in regenerative medicine.
Usage of genetically modified stem cells
Genetically modified cells include fibroblasts, Schwann cells,
macrophages, ES cells, OECs, MSCs, and NSCs: i.e., all cell
types tested for cell therapy have been genetically modified to
enhance their therapeutic potential. For genetic modification,
retroviral vectors provide a stable and safe means to modify
cells to express high levels of neurotrophic factors without the
expression of wild-type viral genes [17].
Gene therapy can provide injured axons and neurons with
a local source of trophic molecules to stimulate neuronal
survival and possibly axonal growth [17]. The expression of
receptors for neurotrophic factors and their pleiotropic
effects on different neuronal and glial cell types makes it
necessary to target trophic molecules to either a specific
subpopulation of neurons or to the injury site itself and its
immediate proximity.
NT-3 genetically modified cells grafted into the lesioned
spinal cord provide not only trophic molecules at the injury
site but also support axonal growth: moreover, they can
provide “bridges” for growing axons to potentially connect
injured spinal cord “stumps” [63].
Genetically modified cells producing BDNF and/or neuro-
trophin (NT)-4/5 have been investigated in several studies.
After midthoracic dorsal hemisection lesions, increased
growth of primary sensory, noradrenergic coerulospinal, and
motor axons into BDNF- and NT-4/5-secreting fibroblast
grafts was observed. BDNF-mediated growth responses of
sensory and cholinergic axons were also found after midthora-
cic contusion injuries [135].
Growth of raphespinal and coerulospinal axons following
BDNF delivery have also been reported, but its extent varies
from study to study, perhaps depending on differences in the
type or site of SCI, in the quality and extent of BDNF
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 301
delivery, and in the cells which vehicle BDNF gene delivery
[135]. Following complete transection at the midthoracic
spinal cord, placement of Schwann cell grafts and infusions
of BDNF and NT-3 induced some growth of coerulospinal
and raphespinal axons [224]. Similar results were obtained
using grafts of Schwann cells genetically modified to secrete
BDNF [135]. Growth factors can also serve to coax sprout-
ing axons to cross the gap across the lesion. Once regener-
ation is stimulated, molecules that provide directional cues
are critical for routing axons to their correct targets [178].
When different growth factors were used in combination
(for example, BDNF and GDNF), they resulted in signifi-
cant reduction of motor dysfunction and spinal cord pathol-
ogy. However, transplantation of fibroblasts genetically
modified to produce neurotrophic factors BDNF or NT-3
onto rat spinal lesion did not show advantage in sensorimo-
tor recovery to either grafting with gelfoam or gelfoam plus
fibroblasts, in addition to increase thermal hyperalgesia [77,
102, 167].
Genetically engineered fibroblasts secreting NGF can
stimulate axons to regenerate into the center of an injury
when implanted in this region [87, 91, 206], although this
sprouting remains within the area of trophic support and
does not lead to long distance functional regeneration. In-
trathecally delivered NT-3, NGF, and GDNF can promote
axonal regeneration across the dorsal root entry zone [158,
159], and glial overexpression of NGF can stimulate regen-
eration of nociceptive axons from the dorsal roots which in
some circumstances may lead to thermal hyperalgesia [165,
198].
More recently, in order to achieve axonal growth, Ham-
ada's [66] group has transfected ES cells with the MASH1
gene, yielding purified spinal motoneuron precursors defi-
cient in the expression of Nogo receptor: after graft on
spinal cord-injured mice, animals showed excellent im-
provement of the motor functions, confirmed by electro-
physiological studies.
Moreover, combination therapy such as treatment with
NT-3 and cAMP together to stimulate neuronal cell bodies
has been shown to allow regeneration beyond the lesion site
of spinal injuries [120], suggesting that the use of multiple
simultaneous approaches to this complex problem may
prove important when constructing future strategies for im-
proving rehabilitation and functional recovery.
Implantable scaffolds
As discussed above, the glial scar represents the main barrier
to axon regeneration at the injury site [186]. Even though
stem cells can penetrate the lesion cavity and establish a
permissive environment to axonal growth, this potential is
limited by many other inhibitory factors [129, 177]. An
innovative means for delivering stem cells to the injury site
and promoting axonal growth consists in seeding stem cells
into scaffolds which support regenerating axons.
A variety of materials has been evaluated to this aim
[124]. One consists in fibrin, due to its biocompatibility,
biodegradability, flexibility, and plasticity [201]. Alone, fi-
brin promotes regeneration and delays accumulation of re-
active astrocytes at the lesion site [86]. Alternatively, fibrin,
enriched with stem cells—usually bone marrow stem cells
(BMSCs) or NP—and/or growth factors—such as NT-3,
NGF, and platelet-derived growth factor—improves surviv-
al, differentiation, and migration of grafted cells, as well as
it determines an increase in neural fiber density [82, 85,
234]. Other natural polymers find extensive use in SCI
treatment, such as collagen and hyaluronic acid, due to their
elasticity, support to cell adhesion and migration, and time
of degradation: in fact, the implantation of these scaffolds
with or without stem cells creates a favorable environment
for nerve regeneration, significantly improving the recovery
of locomotor and sensory functions [152, 212]. NVR-N-Gel
(biodegradable co-polymer neurotube containing viscous
gel) is a crosslinked hyaluronic acid with the adhesive
molecule laminin, and growth factors [164]. Time of degra-
dation is important in order to be progressively replaced by
the matrix produced from transplanted and host cells. When
drug or neurotrophic factors were loaded in a polymer nano-
carrier, this system can reduce neuroinflammation in acute
stage [36] and support the axonal outgrowth and the synap-
tic reconnection in the delayed phase [192].
In alternative to natural scaffolds, synthetic polymers
allow a wider control of chemical and physical character-
istics of the material, even succeeding to mimic the structure
of white and grey matter found in the uninjured spinal cord.
They consist of biodegradable hydrogels [polyester of lactic
acid (PLA), polyester of glycolic acid (PGA), and polyeth-
ylene glycol (PEG)] or non-biodegradable hydrogels,
methacrylate-based. The delivery of NSCs and Schwann
cells via PGA scaffold enhances their growth-promoting
properties on axons across the transected spinal cord
[149]. These results have been confirmed both by histolog-
ical analysis in terms of reduction of lost tissue and dimin-
ished glial scarring, and behavioral assessment in terms of
coordinated, weight-bearing, and hindlimb stepping [200].
Moreover, other promising scaffolds such as poly(N-isopro-
pylacrylamide)-co-poly(ethylene glycol) (PNIPAAm-
PEG) and HPMA-RGD hydrogels [N-(2-hydroxypropyl)-
methacrylamide with attached amino acid sequences-Arg-
Gly-Asp], seeded with MSCs, have obtained positive results
in SCI [37, 73].
Finally, as reviewed by Madigan [124], the scaffolds
seem to support stem cell differentiation, especially fibrin
scaffolds. Therefore, combining scaffolds with cell trans-
plantation represents a promising alternative to injection
302 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
methods, since such scaffolds not only support regener-
ation but also enhance cell survival after transplantation
and promote differentiation into desired phenotypes. On
the other hand, non-biodegradable biomaterial-based
treatment can cause a chronic compression of regenerat-
ing axons, and the transplant site can act as a sink,
precluding sprouting to escape and reconnect with the host
spinal cord.
Clinical trials
Most in vivo studies relative to therapy of SCI are performed
in rodents. There are, however, many species specificities
when compared to humans, for example, in the anatomy of
motor pathways and behavior. Therefore, although prelimi-
nary studies in animals are necessary and fundamental, re-
search on SCI should aim to trials in humans.
In a clinical trial in 2004, intravenous injection of autolo-
gous BMSCs resulted in a significant improvement, from
American Spinal Injury Association score B to D, in only
one over nine SCI patients [160]; however, BMSCs were well
tolerated during the observation period. A phase I study
established safety in acute complete SCI: of eight enrolled
ASIAA patients, two improved to ASIA C after 6 months and
three to ASIA C after 1 year, with some bladder recovery [97].
In the first cell-based therapy for acute complete SCI multi-
center randomized controlled phase II study (ProCord), en-
rolling only patients with complete SCI, treated macrophages
promoted recovery from SCI [97]. Phase II was stopped when
Proneuron Biotechnologies, Inc. (Los Angeles, CA, USA),
the parent company, found that most patients had undergone
surgery twice, a first time for biomechanical stabilization, and
a second, approximately 2 weeks post-injury, concomitantly
with macrophage injection. In addition, surgeons had some
difficulties to accurately identify the border of the lesion
where activated macrophages were to be injected.
It has also been suggested that delivery of autologous
BM precursors via lumbar puncture or activated macro-
phages into the CNS might be an acceptable alternative to
the intravenous administration [5, 27, 97]. A phase I/II
nonrandomized study, using autologous BMCs injection
into the perilesional area at different time points post-
injury (within 14 days, between 15 days and 8 weeks, and
after 8 weeks) in 35 patients with complete SCI, combined
with administration of GMCS-F (granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor), obtained an improvement in the
American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (AIS)
impairment scale grade in 30% of patients (from A to B
or C) compared to controls [227]. Whereas no side
effects at a 10-month follow-up are reported, neuropath-
ic pain during the treatment and tumor formation at the
site of transplantation still remain to be investigated in
the long term [227].
Other studies tested the inflammatory microenvironment
before stem cell administration. Patients first underwent
intravenous injection of autoimmune T cells. NSCs, trans-
differentiated from BMSC in culture with autologous auto-
immune T cells, were injected into the lesion site of two
patients with chronic SCI, demonstrating some level of
motor and sensory recovery [139]. In another preliminary
safety trial in 2006, safety, feasibility, and good tolerance of
HSC transplantation via lumbar puncture were demonstrat-
ed in a group of ten patients [139].
Finally, olfactory mucosa autografts into the SCI lesion
succeeded to fill the site and trigger some functional recov-
ery [112]. In another study [80], olfactory bulb derived from
aborted fetuses was transplanted, but the short follow-up
precluded any conclusion.
Clinical trials basically showed the safety of the transplan-
tation procedures. The benefit of cell replacement therapy
however can only be established by further clinical phase II/
III trials. Actually, the variable and sometimes inconclusive
findings from human trials would argue that a better under-
standing of the biological mechanisms and potential of cell
replacement therapies in animal injury models must be
obtained before clinical translation. Even a stem cell-based
therapeutic strategy eventually successful in clinical trials still
faces practical issues to be translated to the clinical practice. It
must be made easily accessible for hospitals, and this ideally
includes the availability of cell banks and the possibility to
distribute stem cells. This is an exciting but not immediately
actual scenario. Regulatory organizations such as Food and
Drug Administration will guide the translation of stem cells
therapy for SCI in animals to human trials. Companies,
researchers, and patients should be aware of the regulatory
issues that must be addressed before starting human experi-
mental trials because of some special concerns: (a) the spinal
cord is site sensitive and dangerous; (b) stem cell therapy is a
new treatment and entails a number of complex issues, such as
toxicities, risk for tumorigenicity, and interactions of cells
with drugs; and (c) clinical deficit could be worsened by
inappropriate stem cell differentiation. Operating procedures
must be compiled to standardize (a) the inclusion criteria and
potential benefits of participating in the trials with stem cells,
since patients have done all therapeutic alternatives, (b) in-
formed consent, (c) the methods in preparing and delivering
cells, (d) equipment and surgical approach, and (e) evaluation
in the follow-up.
Conclusion
Although we may never be able to “regrow” large areas of
spinal cord injured, stem cell technology is a rapidly
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 303
evolving field that will impact the future treatment of SCI,
exploiting both limited CNS neurogenesis and exogenous
stem cells complementary advantages. Transplantation of
stem cells represents an important new approach to manag-
ing SCI. Improvements in molecular and microscopic tech-
niques along with the availability of modified stem cell lines
have accelerated research into stem cell transplantation. The
fact that functional gains have been demonstrated in animal
models after delivery of cells of both neural and non-neural
origin in preclinical models of CNS injury is encouraging.
Nevertheless, caution is necessary to ensure the highest
standards of safety and scientific method as this exciting
field moves forward. Cell-based therapy in SCI had the goal
to (1) replace new neurons that die within the first minutes
to days after injury, (2) provide a source of cells to
promote remyelination and axonal sprouting, and (3)
deliver trophic molecules that can promote cellular protection
and plasticity.
In order to apply these techniques, however, it is critical
that we continuously consider that patients might benefit
from additional treatment. Work from multiple labs is sug-
gesting that the cell's microenvironment is important in
establishing the sequence of what cells will and will not
do, particularly in vitro systems. With this combination of
expertise, and with important links to national resources, the
hope is to quickly translate basic science studies into clinical
trials, avoiding the usual roadblock between the two areas of
endeavor.
References
1. Ahmed S (2009) The culture of neural stem cells. J Cell Biochem
106(1):1–6
2. Akama K, Tatsuno R, Otsu M, Horikoshi T, Nakayama T,
Nakamura M, Toda T, Inoue N (2008) Proteomic identification of
differentially expressed genes in mouse neural stem cells and neu-
rons differentiated from embryonic stem cells in vitro. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1784(5):773–782
3. Akiyama Y, Radtke C, Kocsis JD (2002) Remyelination of the rat
spinal cord by transplantation of identified bone marrow stromal
cells. J Neurosci 22(15):6623–6630
4. Alexander JK, Popovich PG (2009) Neuroinflammation in spinal
cord injury: therapeutic targets for neuroprotection and regenera-
tion. Prog Brain Res 175:125–137
5. Amador MJ, Guest JD (2005) An appraisal of ongoing experi-
mental procedures in human spinal cord injury. J Neurol Phys
Ther 29(2):70–86
6. Amariglio N, Hirshberg A, Scheithauer BW, Cohen Y, Loewenthal
R, Trakhtenbrot L, Paz N, Koren-Michowitz M, Waldman D,
Leider-Trejo L, Toren A, Constantini S, Rechavi G (2009) Donor-
derived brain tumor following neural stem cell transplantation in an
ataxia telangiectasia patient. PLoS Med 6(2):e1000029
7. Azizi SA, Stokes D, Augelli BJ, DiGirolamo C, Prockop DJ
(1998) Engraftment and migration of human bone marrow stro-
mal cells implanted in the brains of albino rats—similarities to
astrocyte grafts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(7):3908–3913
8. Bakshi A, Barshinger AL, Swanger SA, Madhavani V, Shumsky
JS, Neuhuber B, Fischer I (2006) Lumbar puncture delivery of
bone marrow stromal cells in spinal cord contusion: a novel
method for minimally invasive cell transplantation. J Neuro-
trauma 23(1):55–65
9. Bareyre FM (2008) Neuronal repair and replacement in spinal
cord injury. J Neurol Sci 265(1–2):63–72
10. Barritt AW, Davies M, Marchand F, Hartley R, Grist J, Yip P,
McMahon SB, Bradbury EJ (2006) Chondroitinase ABC pro-
motes sprouting of intact and injured spinal systems after spinal
cord injury. J Neurosci 26:10856–10867
11. Bayés A, Grant SG (2009) Neuroproteomics: understanding the
molecular organization and complexity of the brain. Nat Rev
Neurosci 10(9):635–646
12. Ben-Hur T (2008) Immunomodulation by neural stem cells. J
Neurol Sci 265(1–2):102–104
13. Benninger F, Beck H, Wernig M, Tucker KL, Brüstle O, Scheffler
B (2003) Functional integration of embryonic stem cell-derived
neurons in hippocampal slice cultures. J Neurosci 23(18):7075–
7083
14. Bhattacharya B, Puri S, Puri RK (2009) A review of gene ex-
pression profiling of human embryonic stem cell lines and their
differentiated progeny. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther 4(2):98–106
15. Bjorklund LM, Sánchez-Pernaute R, Chung S, Andersson T, Chen
IY, McNaught KS, Brownell AL, Jenkins BG, Wahlestedt C, Kim
KS, Isacson O (2002) Embryonic stem cells develop into functional
dopaminergic neurons after transplantation in a Parkinson rat model.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99(4):2344–2349
16. Blakemore WF (1984) Limited remyelination of CNS axons by
Schwann cells transplanted into the sub-arachnoid space. J Neu-
rol Sci 64:265–276
17. Blesch A, Grill RJ, Tuszynski MH (1998) Neurotrophin gene
therapy in CNS models of trauma and degeneration. Prog Brain
Res 117:473–484
18. Boido M, Rupa R, Garbossa D, Fontanella M, Ducati A, Vercelli
A (2009) Embryonic and adult stem cells promote raphespinal
axon outgrowth and improve functional outcome following spinal
hemisection in mice. Eur J Neurosci 30(5):833–846
19. Boido M, Garbossa D, Vercelli A (2011) Early graft of neural
precursors in spinal cord compression reduces glial cyst and
improves function. J Neurosurg Spine 15(1):97–106
20. Bovolenta P, Fernaud-Espinosa I, Mendez-Otero R, Nieto-
Sampedro M (1997) Neurite outgrowth inhibitor of gliotic brain
tissue. Mode of action and cellular localization, studied with
specific monoclonal antibodies. Eur J Neurosci 9:977–989
21. Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, King VR, Bennet GS, Patel
PN, Fawcett JW, McMahon SB (2002) Chondroitinase ABC
promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature
416:636–640
22. Brederlau A, Correia AS, Anisimov SV, Elmi M, Paul G, Roybon
L, Morizane A, Bergquist F, Riebe I, Nannmark U, Carta M,
Hanse E, Takahashi J, Sasai Y, Funa K, Brundin P, Eriksson PS,
Li JY (2006) Transplantation of human embryonic stem cell-
derived cells to a rat model of Parkinson's disease: effect of in
vitro differentiation on graft survival and teratoma formation.
Stem Cells 24(6):1433–1440
23. Brüstle O, Jones KN, Learish RD, Karram K, Choudhary K,
Wiestler OD, Duncan ID, McKay RD (1999) Embryonic stem
cell-derived glial precursors—a source of myelinating trans-
plants. Science 285:754–756
24. Brüstle O, Spiro AC, Karram K, Choudhary K, Okabe S, McKay
RD (1997) In vitro-generated neural precursors participate in
mammalian brain development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
94:14809–14814
25. Burns TC, Ortiz-González XR, Gutiérrez-Pérez M, Keene CD,
Sharda R, Demorest BZL, Jiang Y, Nelson-Holte M, Soriano M,
304 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
Nakagawa Y, Luquin MR, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Prósper F, Low
WC, Verfaillie CM (2006) Thymidine analogs are transferred
from prelabeled donor to host cells in the central nervous system
after transplantation: a word of caution. Stem Cells 24(4):1121–
1127
26. Cafferty WB, Yang SH, Duffy PJ, Li S, Strittmatter SM (2007)
Functional axonal regeneration through astrocytic scar genetical-
ly modified to digest chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. J Neuro-
sci 27:2176–2185
27. Callera F, do Nascimento RX (2006) Delivery of autologous bone
marrow precursor cells into the spinal cord via lumbar puncture
technique in patients with spinal cord injury: a preliminary safety
study. Exp Hematol 34(2):130–131
28. Cao QL, Zhang YP, Howard RM, Walters WM, Tsoulfas P,
Whittemore SR (2001) Pluripotent stem cells engrafted into the
normal or lesioned adult rat spinal cord are restricted to a glial
lineage. Exp Neurol 167:48–58
29. Cao Q, Xu XM, Devries WH, Enzmann GU, Ping P, Tsoulfas P,
Wood PM, Bunge MB, Whittemore SR (2005) Functional recov-
ery in traumatic spinal cord injury after transplantation of
multineurotrophin-expressing glial-restricted precursor cells. J
Neurosci 25(30):6947–6957
30. Capone C, Frigerio S, Fumagalli S, Gelati M, Principato MC,
Storini C, Montinaro M, Kraftsik R, De Curtis M, Parati E, De
Simoni MG (2007) Neurosphere-derived cells exert a neuropro-
tective action by changing the ischemic microenvironment. PLoS
One 2(4):e373
31. Carson CT, Aigner S, Gage FH (2006) Stem cells: the good, bad
and barely in control. Nat Med 12(11):1237–1238
32. Chen SW, Xie YF (2009) Glial implications in transplantation
therapy of spinal cord injury. Chin J Traumatol 12(1):55–61
33. Chopp M, Li Y (2002) Treatment of neural injury with marrow
stromal cells. Lancet Neurol 1(2):92–100
34. Chow SY, Moul J, Tobias CA, Himes BT, Liu Y, Obrocka
M, Hodge L, Tessler A, Fischer I (2000) Characterization
and intraspinal grafting of EGF/bFGF-dependent neuro-
spheres derived from embryonic rat spinal cord. Brain Res
874:87–106
35. Chung S, Shin BS, Hedlund E, Pruszak J, Ferree A, Kang UJ,
Isacson O, Kim KS (2006) Genetic selection of sox1GFP-
expressing neural precursors removes residual tumorigenic plu-
ripotent stem cells and attenuates tumor formation after transplan-
tation. J Neurochem 97(5):1467–1480
36. Chvatal SA, Kim YT, Bratt-Leal AM, Lee H, Bellamkonda RV
(2008) Spatial distribution and acute anti-inflammatory effects of
methylprednisolone after sustained local delivery to the contused
spinal cord. Biomaterials 29(12):1967–1975
37. Comolli N, Neuhuber B, Fischer I, Lowman A (2009) In vitro
analysis of PNIPAAm-PEG, a novel, injectable scaffold for spinal
cord repair. Acta Biomater 5(4):1046–1055
38. Conti L, Cattaneo E (2005) Controlling neural stem cell division
within the adult subventricular zone: an APPealing job. Trends
Neurosci 28(2):57–59
39. Corti S, Locatelli F, Papadimitriou D, Donadoni C, Del Bo R,
Fortunato F, Strazzer S, Salani S, Bresolin N, Comi GP (2005)
Multipotentiality, homing properties, and pyramidal neurogenesis
of CNS-derived LeX(ssea-1)+/CXCR4+ stem cells. FASEB J 19
(13):1860–1862
40. Coutts M, Keirstead HS (2008) Stem cells for the treatment of
spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 209(2):368–377
41. Coyne TM, Marcus AJ, Woodbury D, Black IB (2006) Marrow
stromal cells transplanted to the adult brain are rejected by an
inflammatory response and transfer donor labels to host neurons
and glia. Stem Cells 24(11):2483–2492
42. Crigler L, Robey RC, Asawachaicharn A, Gaupp D, Phinney DG
(2006) Human mesenchymal stem cell subpopulations express a
variety of neuro-regulatory molecules and promote neuronal cell
survival and neuritogenesis. Exp Neurol 198(1):54–64
43. Cristofanilli M, Harris VK, Zigelbaum A, Goossens AM, Lu A,
Rosenthal H, Sadiq SA (2011) Mesenchymal stem cells enhance
the engraftment and myelinating ability of allogeneic oligoden-
drocyte progenitors in dysmyelinated mice. Stem Cells Dev
20:2065–2076
44. Cummings BJ, Uchida N, Tamaki SJ, Salazar DL, Hooshmand M,
Summers R, Gage FH, Anderson AJ (2005) Human neural stem
cells differentiate and promote locomotor recovery in spinal cord-
injured mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102(39):14069–14074
45. Davies SJ, Shih CH, Noble M, Mayer-Proschel M, Davies JE,
Proschel C (2011) Transplantation of specific human astrocytes
promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury. PLoS One
6(3):e17328
46. Deng W, Obrocka M, Fischer I, Prockop DJ (2001) In vitro
differentiation of human marrow stromal cells into early progen-
itors of neural cells by conditions that increase intracellular cyclic
AMP. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 282(1):148–152
47. Deng J, Petersen BE, Steindler DA, Jorgensen ML, Laywell ED
(2006) Mesenchymal stem cells spontaneously express neural
proteins in culture and are neurogenic after transplantation. Stem
Cells 4(4):1054–1064
48. Djouad F, Plence P, Bony C, Tropel P, Apparailly F, Sany J, Noël
D, Jorgensen C (2003) Immunosuppressive effect of mesenchy-
mal stem cells favors tumor growth in allogeneic animals. Blood
102(10):3837–3844
49. Eftekharpour E, Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Fehlings MG (2008)
Current status of experimental cell replacement approaches to
spinal cord injury. Neurosurg Focus 24(3–4):E19
50. Englund U, Bjorklund A, Wictorin K, Lindvall O, Kokaia M
(2002) Grafted neural stem cells develop into functional pyrami-
dal neurons and integrate into host cortical circuitry. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 99(26):17089–17094
51. Eriksson C, Björklund A, Wictorin K (2003) Neuronal differen-
tiation following transplantation of expanded mouse neurosphere
cultures derived from different embryonic forebrain regions. Exp
Neurol 84(2):615–635
52. Evans MJ, Kaufman MH (1981) Establishment in culture of
pluripotential cells from mouse embryos. Nature 292(5819):
154–156
53. Fawcett JW, Asher RA (1999) The glial scar and central nervous
system repair. Brain Res Bull 49:377–391
54. FitchMT, Silver J (2008) CNS injury, glial scars, and inflammation:
inhibitory extracellular matrices and regeneration failure. Exp Neu-
rol 209(2):294–301
55. Fleming JC, Norenberg MD, Ramsay DA, Dakeban GA, Marcillo
AE, Saenz AD, Pasquale-Styles M, Dietrich WD, Waever LC
(2006) The cellular inflammatory response in human spinal cords
after injury. Brain 129(pt 12):3249–3269
56. Folman Y, Masri WE (1989) Spinal cord injury: prognostic
indicators. Injury 20:92–93
57. Gil JE, Woo DH, Shim JH, Kim SE, You HJ, Park SH, Paek SH,
Kim SK, Kim JH (2009) Vitronectin promotes oligodendrocyte
differentiation during neurogenesis of human embryonic stem
cells. FEBS Lett 583(3):561–567
58. Giordano A, Galderisi U, Marino IR (2007) From the laboratory
bench to the patient's bedside: an update on clinical trials with
mesenchymal stem cells. J Cell Physiol 211(1):27–35
59. Giordano F, De Marzo A, Vetrini F, Marigo V (2007) Fibroblast
growth factor and epidermal growth factor differently affect dif-
ferentiation of murine retinal stem cells in vitro. Mol Vis
13:1842–1850
60. Glaser T, Brüstle O (2005) Retinoic acid induction of ES-cell-
derived neurons: the radial glia connection. Trends Neurosci 28
(8):397–400
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 305
61. Glazova M, Pak ES, Moretto J, Hollis S, Brewer KL, Murashov
AK (2009) Pre-differentiated embryonic stem cells promote neu-
ronal regeneration by cross-coupling of BDNF and IL-6 signaling
pathways in the host tissue. J Neurotrauma 26(7):1029–1042
62. Gottlieb DI (2002) Large-scale sources of neural stem cells. Annu
Rev Neurosci 25:381–407
63. Grill RJ, Blesch A, Tuszynski MH (1997) Robust growth of
chronically injured spinal cord axons induced by grafts of
genetically modified NGF-secreting cells. Exp Neurol 148:
444–452
64. Grimpe B, Silver J (2004) A novel DNA enzyme reduces gly-
cosaminoglycan chains in the glial scar and allows microtrans-
planted dorsal root ganglia axons to regenerate beyond lesions in
the spinal cord. J Neurosci 24:1393–1397
65. Habib NA, Gordon MY (2006) Clinical applications of stem cell
therapy—the pros and cons of stem cell sources. Regen Med 1
(3):301–302
66. Hamada M, Yoshikawa H, Ueda Y, Kurokawa MS, Watanabe K,
Sakakibara M, Tadokoro M, Akashi K, Aoki H, Suzuki N (2006)
Introduction of the MASH1 gene into mouse embryonic stem
cells leads to differentiation of motoneuron precursors lacking
Nogo receptor expression that can be applicable for transplanta-
tion to spinal cord injury. Neurobiol Dis 22(3):509–522
67. Hammang JP, Archer DR, Duncan ID (1997) Myelination fol-
lowing transplantation of EGF-responsive neural stem cells into a
myelin-deficient environment. Exp Neurol 147:84–95
68. Han SS, Kang DY, Mujtaba T, Rao MS, Fischer I (2002) Grafted
lineage-restricted precursors differentiate exclusively into neu-
rons in the adult spinal cord. Exp Neurol 177:360–375
69. Han SS, Liu Y, Tyler-Polsz C, Rao MS, Fischer I (2004) Trans-
plantation of glial-restricted precursor cells into the adult spinal
cord: survival, glial-specific differentiation, and preferential mi-
gration in white matter. Glia 45:1–16
70. Hardy SA, Maltman DJ, Przyborski SA (2008) Mesenchymal
stem cells as mediators of neural differentiation. Curr Stem Cell
Res Ther 3(1):43–52
71. Harkany T, Andäng M, Kingma HJ, Görcs TJ, Holmgren CD,
Zilberter Y, Ernfors P (2004) Region-specific generation of func-
tional neurons from naive embryonic stem cells in adult brain. J
Neurochem 88(5):1229–1239
72. Hausmann ON (2003) Post-traumatic inflammation following
spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 41(7):369–378
73. Hejčl A, Sedý J, Kapcalová M, Toro DA, Amemori T, Lesný P,
Likavčanová-Mašínová K, Krumbholcová E, Přádný M, Michálek
J, Burian M, Hájek M, Jendelová P, Syková E (2010) HPMA-RGD
hydrogels seeded with mesenchymal stem cells improve functional
outcome in chronic spinal cord injury. Stem Cells Dev 19
(10):1535–1546
74. Heng BC, Liu H, Cao T (2005) Transplanted human embryonic
stem cells as biological ‘catalysts’ for tissue repair and regener-
ation. Med Hypotheses 64(6):1085–1088
75. Herrera DG, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999) Adult-
derived neural precursors transplanted into multiple regions in the
adult brain. Ann Neurol 46(6):867–877
76. Hofstetter CP, Schwarz EJ, Hess D, Widenfalk J, El Manira A,
Prockop DJ, Olson L (2002) Marrow stromal cells form guiding
strands in the injured spinal cord and promote recovery. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 99:2199–2204
77. Hofstetter CP, Holmström NA, Lilja JA, Schweinhardt P, Hao J,
Spenger C, Wiesenfeld-Hallin Z, Kurpad SN, Frisén J, Olson L
(2005) Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem
cell grafts; directed differentiation improves outcome. Nat Neuro-
sci 8:346–353
78. Honma T, Honmou O, Iihoshi S, Harada K, Houkin K, Hamada
H, Kocsis JD (2006) Intravenous infusion of immortalized human
mesenchymal stem cells protects against injury in a cerebral
ischemia model in adult rat. Exp Neurol 199(1):56–66
79. Hsu YC, Lee DC, Chiu IM (2007) Neural stem cells, neural
progenitors, and neurotrophic factors. Cell Transplant 16
(2):133–150
80. Huang H, Wang H, Chen L, Gu Z, Zhang J, Zhang F, Song Y, Li
Y, Tan K, Liu Y, Xi H (2006) Influence factors for functional
improvement after olfactory ensheathing cell transplantation for
chronic spinal cord injury. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke
Za Zhi 20(4):434–438
81. Hurtado A, Moon LD, Maquet V, Blits B, Jérôme R, Oudega
M (2006) Poly(D,L-lactic acid) macroporous guidance scaf-
folds seeded with Schwann cells genetically modified to
secrete a bi-functional neurotrophin implanted in the com-
pletely transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord. Biomaterials
27(3):430–442
82. Itosaka H, Kuroda S, Shichinohe H, Yasuda H, Yano S, Kamei S,
Kawamura R, Hida K, Iwasaki Y (2009) Fibrin matrix provides a
suitable scaffold for bone marrow stromal cells transplanted into
injured spinal cord: a novel material for CNS tissue engineering.
Neuropathology 29(3):248–257
83. Iwanami A, Kaneko S, Nakamura M, Kanemura Y, Mori H,
Kobayashi S, Yamasaki M, Momoshima S, Ishii H, Ando K,
Tanioka Y, Tamaoki N, Nomura T, Toyama Y, Okano H (2005)
Transplantation of human neural stem cells for spinal cord injury
in primates. J Neurosci Res 80(2):182–190
84. Jiang Y, Jahagirdar BN, Reinhardt RL, Schwartz RE, Keene CD,
Ortiz-Gonzalez XR, Reyes M, Lenvik T, Lund T, Blackstad M,
Du J, Aldrich S, Lisberg A, LowWC, Largaespada DA, Verfaillie
CM (2002) Pluripotency of mesenchymal stem cells derived from
adult marrow. Nature 418(6893):41–49, Erratum in: Nature. 2007
Jun 14;447(7146):879–80
85. Johnson PJ, Tatara A, Shiu A, Sakiyama-Elbert SE (2010) Con-
trolled release of neurotrophin-3 and platelet-derived growth fac-
tor from fibrin scaffolds containing neural progenitor cells
enhances survival and differentiation into neurons in a subacute
model of SCI. Cell Transplant 19(1):89–101
86. Johnson PJ, Parker SR, Sakiyama-Elbert SE (2010) Fibrin-based
tissue engineering scaffolds enhance neural fiber sprouting and
delay the accumulation of reactive astrocytes at the lesion in a
subacute model of spinal cord injury. J Biomed Mater Res A 92
(1):152–163
87. Jones LL, Sajed D, Tuszynski MH (2003) Axonal regeneration
through regions of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan deposition
after spinal cord injury: a balance of permissiveness and inhibi-
tion. J Neurosci 23:9276–9288
88. Kamada T, Koda M, Dezawa M, Anahara R, Toyama Y, Yoshinaga
K, Hashimoto M, Koshizuka S, Nishio Y, Mannoji C, Okawa A,
Yamazaki M (2011) Transplantation of human bone marrow stro-
mal cell-derived Schwann cells reduces cystic cavity and promotes
functional recovery after contusion injury of adult rat spinal cord.
Neuropathology 31(1):48–58
89. Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Eftekharpour E, Wang J, Morshead CM,
Fehlings MG (2006) Delayed transplantation of adult neural
precursor cells promotes remyelination and functional neurolog-
ical recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 26(13):3377–
3389
90. Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Eftekharpour E, Wang J, Schut D, Fehlings
MG (2010) Synergistic effects of transplanted adult neural stem/
progenitor cells, chondroitinase, and growth factors promote func-
tional repair and plasticity of the chronically injured spinal cord. J
Neurosci 30(5):1657–1676
91. Kawaja MD, Gage FH (1991) Reactive astrocytes are substrates
for the growth of adult CNS axons in the presence of elevated
levels of nerve growth factor. Neuron 7:1019–1030
306 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
92. Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G, Totoiu M, Cluotier F, Sharp K,
Steward O (2005) Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligoden-
drocyte progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and restore loco-
motion after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 25(19):4694–4705
93. Kelly S, Bliss TM, Shah AK, Sun GH, Ma M, Foo WC, Masel J,
Yenari MA, Weissman IL, Uchida N, Palmer T, Steinberg GK
(2004) Transplanted human fetal neural stem cells survive, mi-
grate, and differentiate in ischemic rat cerebral cortex. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 101(32):11839–11844
94. Kim BJ, Seo JH, Bubien JK, Oh YS (2002) Differentiation of
adult bone marrow stem cells into neuroprogenitor cells in vitro.
Neuroreport 13(9):1185–1188
95. Kim DW, Chung S, Hwang M, Ferree A, Tsai HC, Park JJ, Chung
S, Nam TS, Kang UJ, Isacson O, Kim KS (2006) Stromal cell-
derived inducing activity, Nurr1, and signaling molecules syner-
gistically induce dopaminergic neurons from mouse embryonic
stem cells. Stem Cells 24(3):557–567
96. King BS, Gupta R, Narayan RK (2000) The early assessment and
intensive care unit management of patients with severe traumatic
brain and spinal cord injuries. Surg Clin North Am 80(3):855–
870
97. Knoller N, Auerbach G, Fulga V, Zelig G, Attias J, Bakimer R,
Marder JB, Yoles E, Belkin M, Schwartz M, Hadani M (2005)
Clinical experience using incubated autologous macrophages as a
treatment for complete spinal cord injury: phase I study results. J
Neurosurg Spine 3(3):173–181
98. Koch P, Kokaia Z, Lindvall O, Brüstle O (2009) Emerging concepts
in neural stem cell research: autologous repair and cell-based dis-
ease modelling. Lancet Neurol 8(9):819–829
99. Koda M, Okada S, Nakayama T, Koshizuka S, Kamada T, Nishio
Y, Someya Y, Yoshinaga K, Okawa A, Moriya H, Yamazaki M
(2005) Hematopoietic stem cell and marrow stromal cell for
spinal cord injury in mice. Neuroreport 16(16):1763–1767
100. Kopen GC, Prockop DJ, Phinney DG (1999) Marrow stromal cells
migrate throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they differentiate
into astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 96:10711–10716
101. Kuai XL, Gagliardi C, Flaat M, Bunnell BA (2009) Differentia-
tion of nonhuman primate embryonic stem cells along neural
lineages. Differentiation 77(3):229–238
102. Kuh SU, Cho YE, Yoon DH, Kim KN, Ha Y (2005) Functional
recovery after human umbilical cord blood cells transplantation
with brain-derived neutrophic factor into the spinal cord injured
rat. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 147(9):985–992
103. Kumar S, Chanda D, Ponnazhagan S (2008) Therapeutic poten-
tial of genetically modified mesenchymal stem cells. Gene Ther
15(10):711–715
104. Lavdas AA, Chen J, Papastefanaki F, Chen S, Schachner M,
Matsas R, Thomaidou D (2010) Schwann cells engineered to
express the cell adhesion molecule L1 accelerate myelination
and motor recovery after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 221
(1):206–216
105. Lee TT, Green BA (2002) Advances in the management of acute
spinal cord injury. Orthop Clin North Am 33(2):311–315
106. Lee KH, Suh-Kim H, Choi JS, Jeun SS, Kim EJ, Kim SS, Yoon
do H, Lee BH (2007) Human mesenchymal stem cell transplan-
tation promotes functional recovery following acute spinal cord
injury in rats. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars) 67(1):13–22
107. Lepore AC, Fischer I (2005) Lineage-restricted neural precursors
survive, migrate, and differentiate following transplantation into
the injured adult spinal cord. Exp Neurol 194:230–242
108. Levenberg S, Burdick JA, Kraehenbuehl T, Langer R (2005)
Neurotrophin-induced differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells on three-dimensional polymeric scaffolds. Tissue Eng 11(3–
4):506–512
109. Li Y, Field PM, Raisman G (1997) Repair of adult rat cortico-
spinal tract by transplants of olfactory ensheathing cells. Science
277:2000–2002
110. Li M, Pevny L, Lovell-Badge R, Smith A (1998) Generation of
purified neural precursors from embryonic stem cells by lineage
selection. Curr Biol 8(17):971–974
111. Li JY, Christophersen NS, Hall V, Soulet D, Brundin P (2008)
Critical issues of clinical human embryonic stem cell therapy for
brain repair. Trends Neurosci 31(3):146–153
112. Lima C, Pratas-Vital J, Escada P, Hasse-Ferreira A, Capucho C,
Peduzzi JD (2006) Olfactory mucosa autografts in human spinal
cord injury: a pilot clinical study. J Spinal Cord Med 29(3):191–203
113. Lindvall O, Kokaia Z (2006) Stem cells for the treatment of
neurological disorders. Nature 441(7097):1094–1096
114. Liour SS, Yu RK (2003) Differentiation of radial glia-like cells
from embryonic stem cells. Glia 42(2):109–117
115. Liu Y, Kim D, Himes BT, Chow SY, Schallert T, Murray M,
Tessler A, Fischer I (1999) Transplants of fibroblasts genetically
modified to express BDNF promote regeneration of adult rat
rubrospinal axons and recovery of forelimb function. J Neurosci
19:4370–4387
116. Liu S, Qu Y, Stewart TJ, Howard MJ, Chakrabortty S, Holekamp
TF, McDonald JW (2000) Embryonic stem cells differentiate into
oligodendrocytes and myelinate in culture and after spinal cord
transplantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:6126–6131
117. Lladó J, Haenggeli C, Maragakis NJ, Snyder EY, Rothstein JD
(2004) Neural stem cells protect against glutamate-induced exci-
totoxicity and promote survival of injured motor neurons through
the secretion of neurotrophic factors. Mol Cell Neurosci 27
(3):322–331
118. Lowell S, Benchoua A, Heavey B, Smith AG (2006) Notch
promotes neural lineage entry by pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. PLoS Biol 4(5):e121
119. Lu P, Jones LL, Snyder EY, Tuszynski MH (2003) Neural stem
cells constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote ex-
tensive host axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol
181(2):115–129
120. Lu P, Yang H, Jones LL, Filbin MT, Tuszynski MH (2004)
Combinatorial therapy with neurotrophins and cAMP promotes
axonal regeneration beyond sites of spinal cord injury. J Neurosci
24:6402–6409
121. Lu P, Blesch A, Tuszynski MH (2004) Induction of bone marrow
stromal cells to neurons: differentiation, transdifferentiation, or
artifact? J Neurosci Res 77(2):174–191
122. Lu P, Tuszynski MH (2005) Can bone marrow-derived stem cells
differentiate into functional neurons? Exp Neurol 193:273–278
123. Madhavan L, Ourednik V, Ourednik J (2008) Neural stem/pro-
genitor cells initiate the formation of cellular networks that pro-
vide neuroprotection by growth factor-modulated antioxidant
expression. Stem Cells 26(1):254–265
124. Madigan NN, McMahon S, O'Brien T, Yaszemski MJ,
Windebank AJ (2009) Current tissue engineering and novel
therapeutic approaches to axonal regeneration following spinal
cord injury using polymer scaffolds. Respir Physiol Neurobiol
169(2):183–199
125. Mareschi K, Novara M, Rustichelli D, Ferrero I, Guido D, Carbone
E, Medico E, Madon E, Vercelli A, Fagioli F (2006) Neural differ-
entiation of human mesenchymal stem cells: evidence for expres-
sion of neural markers and eag K+ channel types. Exp Hematol 34
(11):1563–1572
126. Martin GR (1981) Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early
mouse embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarci-
noma stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 78(12):7634–7638
127. Matsuda R, YoshikawaM, Kimura H, Ouji Y, Nakase H, Nishimura
F, Nonaka J, Toriumi H, Yamada S, Nishiofuku M, Moriya K,
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 307
Ishizaka S, Nakamura M, Sakaki T (2009) Cotransplantation of
mouse embryonic stem cells and bone marrow stromal cells follow-
ing spinal cord injury suppresses tumor development. Cell Trans-
plant 18(1):39–54
128. Maurer MH, Tripps WK, Feldmann RE Jr, Kuschinsky W (2003)
Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors
in rat neural stem cells. Neurosci Lett 344(3):165–168
129. McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y, Liu S, Mickey SK, Turetsky D,
Gottlieb DI, Choi DW (1999) Transplanted embryonic stem cells
survive, differentiate and promote recovery in injured rat spinal
cord. Nature Med 5:1410–1412
130. McDonald JW, Sadowsky C (2002) Spinal-cord injury. Lancet
359(9304):417–425
131. McDonald JW, Howard MJ (2002) Repairing the damaged spinal
cord: a summary of our early success with embryonic stem cell
transplantation and remyelination. Prog Brain Res 137:299–309
132. McKeon RJ, Hoke A, Silver J (1995) Injury-induced proteogly-
cans inhibit the potential for laminin-mediated axon growth on
astrocytic scars. Exp Neurol 136:32–43
133. McKeon RJ, Schreiber RC, Rudge JS, Silver J (1991) Reduction
of neurite outgrowth in a model of glial scarring following CNS
injury is correlated with the expression of inhibitory molecules on
reactive astrocytes. J Neurosci 11:3398–3411
134. Meirelles Lda S, Fontes AM, Covas DT, Caplan AI (2009)
Mechanisms involved in the therapeutic properties of mesenchy-
mal stem cells. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 20(5–6):419–427
135. Menei P, Montero-Menei C, Whittemore SR, Bunge RP, Bunge
MB (1998) Schwann cells genetically modified to secrete human
BDNF promote enhanced axonal regrowth across transected adult
rat spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 10:607–621
136. Menon LG, Picinich S, Koneru R, Gao H, Lin SY, Koneru M,
Mayer-Kuckuk P, Glod J, Banerjee D (2007) Differential gene
expression associated with migration of mesenchymal stem cells
to conditioned medium from tumor cells or bone marrow cells.
Stem Cells 25(2):520–528
137. Mitsui T, Shumsky JS, Lepore AC, Murray M, Fischer I (2005)
Transplantation of neuronal and glial restricted precursors into
contused spinal cord improves bladder and motor functions,
decreases thermal hypersensitivity, and modifies intraspinal cir-
cuitry. J Neurosci 25:9624–9636
138. Miura M, Miura Y, Padilla-Nash HM, Molinolo AA, Fu B, Patel
V, Seo BM, Sonoyama W, Zheng JJ, Baker CC, Chen W, Ried T,
Shi S (2006) Accumulated chromosomal instability in murine
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells leads to malignant trans-
formation. Stem Cells 24(4):1095–1103
139. Moviglia GA, Fernandez Viña R, Brizuela JA, Saslavsky J,
Vrsalovic F, Varela G, Bastos F, Farina P, Etchegaray G, Barbieri
M, Martinez G, Picasso F, Schmidt Y, Brizuela P, Gaeta CA,
Costanzo H, Moviglia Brandolino MT, Merino S, Pes ME,
Veloso MJ, Rugilo C, Tamer I, Shuster GS (2006) Combined
protocol of cell therapy for chronic spinal cord injury. Report on the
electrical and functional recovery of two patients. Cytotherapy 8
(3):202–209
140. Muñoz-Elias G, Marcus AJ, Coyne TM, Woodbury D, Black IB
(2004) Adult bone marrow stromal cells in the embryonic brain:
engraftment, migration, differentiation, and long-term survival. J
Neurosci 24(19):4585–4595
141. Myckatyn TM, Mackinnon SE, McDonald JW (2004) Stem cell
transplantation and other novel techniques for promoting recov-
ery from spinal cord injury. Tanspl Immunol 12(3–4):343–358
142. Neuhuber B, Timothy Himes B, Shumsky JS, Gallo G, Fischer I
(2005) Axon growth and recovery of function supported by
human bone marrow stromal cells in the injured spinal cord
exhibit donor variations. Brain Res 1035(1):73–85
143. Nishio Y, Koda M, Kamada T, Someya Y, Yoshinaga K, Okada S,
Harada H, Okawa A, Moriya H, Yamazaki M (2006) The use of
hemopoietic stem cells derived from human umbilical cord blood to
promote restoration of spinal cord tissue and recovery of hindlimb
function in adult rats. J Neurosurg Spine 5(5):424–433
144. Nistor GI, Totoiu MO, Haque N, Carpenter MK, Keirstead HS
(2005) Human embryonic stem cells differentiate into oligoden-
drocytes in high purity and myelinate after spinal cord transplan-
tation. Glia 49(3):385–396
145. Noël D, Djouad F, Bouffi C, Mrugala D, Jorgensen C (2007)
Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells and immune tolerance.
Leuk Lymphoma 48(7):1283–1289
146. Ogawa Y, Sawamoto K, Miyata T, Miyao S, Watanabe M,
Nakamura M, Bregman BS, Koike M, Uchiyama Y, Toyama Y,
Okano H (2002) Transplantation of in vitro-expanded fetal neural
progenitor cells results in neurogenesis and functional recovery
after spinal cord contusion injury in adult rats. J Neurosci Res 69
(6):925–933
147. Okano H (2002) Stem cell biology of the central nervous system.
J Neurosci Res 69(6):698–707
148. Okano H, Ogawa Y, Nakamura M, Kaneko S, Iwanami A,
Toyama Y (2003) Transplantation of neural stem cells into
the spinal cord after injury. Semin Cell Dev Biol 14(3):191–
198
149. Olson HE, Rooney GE, Gross L, Nesbitt JJ, Galvin KE, Knight
A, Chen B, Yaszemski MJ, Windebank AJ (2009) Neural stem
cell- and Schwann cell-loaded biodegradable polymer scaffolds
support axonal regeneration in the transected spinal cord. Tissue
Eng Part A 15(7):1797–1805
150. Oudega M, Xu XM (2006) Schwann cell transplantation for
repair of the adult spinal cord. J Neurotrauma 23(3–4):453–467
151. Pannucci C, Myckatyn TM, Mackinnon SE, Hayashi A (2007)
End-to-side nerve repair: review of the literature. Restor Neurol
Neurosci 25(1):45–63
152. Park J, Lim E, Back S, Na H, Park Y, Sun K (2010) Nerve regener-
ation following spinal cord injury using matrix metalloproteinase-
sensitive, hyaluronic acid-based biomimetic hydrogel scaffold con-
taining brain-derived neurotrophic factor. J Biomed Mater Res A 93
(3):1091–1099
153. Parr AM, Kulbatski I, Wang XH, Keating A, Tator CH (2008)
Fate of transplanted adult neural stem/progenitor cells and bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells in the injured adult
rat spinal cord and impact on functional recovery. Surg Neurol 70
(6):600–607
154. Pedemonte E, Benvenuto F, Casazza S, Mancardi G, Oksenberg
JR, Uccelli A, Baranzini SE (2007) The molecular signature of
therapeutic mesenchymal stem cells exposes the architecture of
the hematopoietic stem cell niche synapse. BMC Genomics 8:65
155. Pluchino S, Quattrini A, Brambilla E, Gritti A, Salani G, Dina G,
Galli R, Del Carro U, Amadio S, Bergami A, Furlan R, Comi G,
Vescovi AL, Martino G (2003) Injection of adult neurospheres
induces recovery in a chronic model of multiple sclerosis. Nature
422(6933):688–694
156. Ponte AL, Marais E, Gallay N, Langonné A, Delorme B, Hérault
O, Charbord P, Domenech J (2007) The in vitro migration capac-
ity of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells: comparison
of chemokine and growth factor chemotactic activities. Stem
Cells 25(7):1737–1745
157. Radtke C, Sasaki M, Lankford KL, Vogt PM, Kocsis JD (2008)
Potential of olfactory ensheathing cells for cell-based therapy in
spinal cord injury. J Rehabil Res Dev 45(1):141–151
158. Ramer MS, Priestley JV, McMahon SB (2000) Functional regen-
eration of sensory axons into the adult spinal cord. Nature
403:312–316
159. Ramer MS, Bishop T, Dockery P, Mobarak MS, O’Leary D,
Fraher JP, Priestley JV, McMahon SB (2002) Neurotrophin-3-
mediated regeneration and recovery of proprioception following
dorsal rhizotomy. Mol Cell Neurosci 19:239–249
308 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
160. Reier PJ (2004) Cellular transplantation strategies for spinal cord
injury and translational neurobiology. NeuroRx 1(4):424–451
161. Reyes M, Verfaillie CM (2001) Characterization of multipotent
adult progenitor cells, a subpopulation of mesenchymal stem
cells. Ann N YAcad Sci 938:231–233
162. Reynolds BA, Weiss S (1992) Generation of neurons and astro-
cytes from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central nervous
system. Science 255:1707–1710
163. Richter MW, Roskams AJ (2008) Olfactory ensheathing cell
transplantation following spinal cord injury: hype or hope? Exp
Neurol 209:353–367
164. Rochkind S, Shahar A, Fliss D, El-Ani D, Astachov L, Hayon T,
Alon M, Zamostiano R, Ayalon O, Biton IE, Cohen Y, Halperin
R, Schneider D, Oron A, Nevo Z (2006) Development of a tissue-
engineered composite implant for treating traumatic paraplegia in
rats. Eur Spine J 15(2):234–245
165. Romero MI, Rangappa N, Li L, Lightfoot E, Garry MG, Smith
GM (2000) Extensive sprouting of sensory afferents and hyper-
algesia induced by conditional expression of nerve growth factor
in the adult spinal cord. J Neurosci 20:4435–4445
166. Ronaghi M, Erceg S, Moreno-Manzano V, Stojkovic M (2010)
Challenges of stem cell therapy for spinal cord injury: human
embryonic stem cells, endogenous neural stem cells, or induced
pluripotent stem cells? Stem Cells 28(1):93–99
167. Ronsyn MW, Daans J, Spaepen G, Chatterjee S, Vermeulen K,
D'Haese P, Van Tendeloo VF, Van Marck E, Ysebaert D, Berne-
man ZN, Jorens PG, Ponsaerts P (2007) Plasmid-based genetic
modification of human bone marrow-derived stromal cells: anal-
ysis of cell survival and transgene expression after transplantation
in rat spinal cord. BMC Biotechnol 7:90
168. Ross JJ, Hong Z, Willenbring B, Zeng L, Isenberg B, Lee EH,
Reyes M, Keirstead SA, Weir EK, Tranquillo RT, Verfaillie CM
(2006) Cytokine-induced differentiation of multipotent adult pro-
genitor cells into functional smooth muscle cells. J Clin Invest
116(12):3139–3149, Erratum in: J Clin Invest. 2007 Jul;117
(7):2014
169. Rossignol S (2006) Plasticity of connections underlying locomo-
tor recovery after central and/or peripheral lesions in the adult
mammals. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361(1473):1647–
1671
170. Rubio D, Garcia-Castro J, Martín MC, de la Fuente R, Cigudosa
JC, Lloyd AC, Bernad A (2005) Spontaneous human adult stem
cell transformation. Cancer Res 65(8):3035–3039, Erratum in:
Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4969
171. Ryan JM, Barry FP, Murphy JM, Mahon BP (2005) Mesenchymal
stem cells avoid allogeneic rejection. J Inflamm (Lond) 2(8)
172. Salazar DL, Uchida N, Hamers FP, Cummings BJ, Anderson AJ
(2010) Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote loco-
motor recovery in an early chronic spinal cord injury NOD-scid
mouse model. PLoS One 5(8):e12272
173. Sánchez-Pernaute R, Studer L, Ferrari D, Perrier A, Lee H,
Viñuela A, Isacson O (2005) Long-term survival of dopa-
mine neurons derived from parthenogenetic primate embry-
onic stem cells (cyno-1) after transplantation. Stem Cells 23
(7):914–922
174. Scheffler B, Schmandt T, Schröder W, Steinfarz B, Husseini L,
Wellmer J, Seifert G, Karram K, Beck H, Blümcke I, Wiestler
OD, Steinhäuser C, Brüstle O (2003) Functional network integra-
tion of embryonic stem cell-derived astrocytes in hippocampal
slice cultures. Development 130(22):5533–5541
175. Scheffler B, Walton NM, Lin DD, Goetz AK, Enikolopov G,
Roper SN, Steindler DA (2005) Phenotypic and functional char-
acterization of adult brain neuropoiesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
102(26):9353–9358
176. Schoen JH (1964) Comparative aspects of the descending fibre
systems in the spinal cord. Prog Brain Res 11:203–222
177. Schwab JM, Beschorner R, Nguyen TD,Meyermann R, Schluesener
HJ (2001) Differential cellular accumulation of connective tissue
growth factor defines a subset of reactive astrocytes, invading fibro-
blasts, and endothelial cells following central nervous system injury
in rats and humans. J Neurotrauma 18:377–388
178. Schwab ME (2002) Repairing the injured spinal cord. Science
295:1029–1031
179. Schwartz RE, Reyes M, Koodie L, Jiang Y, Blackstad M,
Lund T, Lenvik T, Johnson S, Hu WS, Verfaillie CM (2002)
Multipotent adult progenitor cells from bone marrow differ-
entiate into functional hepatocyte-like cells. J Clin Invest 109
(10):1291–1302
180. Sedý J, Urdzíková L, Jendelová P, Syková E (2008) Methods for
behavioral testing of spinal cord injured rats. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 32(3):550–580
181. Serafini M, Dylla SJ, Oki M, Heremans Y, Tolar J, Jiang Y, Buckley
SM, Pelacho B, Burns TC, Frommer S, Rossi DJ, Bryder D,
Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, O'Shaughnessy MJ, Nelson-Holte M, Fine
GC, Weissman IL, Blazar BR, Verfaillie CM (2007) Hematopoietic
reconstitution by multipotent adult progenitor cells: precursors to
long-term hematopoietic stem cells. J Exp Med 204(1):129–139,
Erratum in: J Exp Med. 2007 Jul 9;204(7):1729
182. Serakinci N, Guldberg P, Burns JS, Abdallah B, Schrødder H, Jensen
T, KassemM (2004)Adult humanmesenchymal stem cell as a target
for neoplastic transformation. Oncogene 23(29):5095–5098
183. Shamblott MJ, Axelman J, Wang S, Bugg EM, Littlefield JW,
Donovan PJ, Blumenthal PD, Huggins GR, Gearhart JD (1998)
Derivation of pluripotent stem cells from cultured human primordial
germ cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(23):13726–13731
184. Shihabuddin LS, Horner PJ, Ray J, Gage FH (2002) Adult spinal
cord stem cells generate neurons after transplantation in the adult
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 20:8727–8735
185. Shyu WC, Lin SZ, Chiang MF, Su CY, Li H (2006) Intracerebral
peripheral blood stem cell (CD34+) implantation induces neuro-
plasticity by enhancing beta1 integrin-mediated angiogenesis in
chronic stroke rats. J Neurosci 26(13):3444–3453
186. Silver J, Miller JH (2004) Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat
Rev Neurosci 5:146–156
187. Skalnikova H, Halada P, Vodicka P, Motlik J, Rehulka P, Hørning
O, Chmelik J, Nørregaard Jensen O, Kovarova H (2007) A
proteomic approach to studying the differentiation of neural stem
cells. Proteomics 7(11):1825–1838
188. Son BR, Marquez-Curtis LA, Kucia M, Wysoczynski M, Turner
AR, Ratajczak J, Ratajczak MZ, Janowska-Wieczorek A (2006)
Migration of bone marrow and cord blood mesenchymal stem
cells in vitro is regulated by stromal-derived factor-1-CXCR4 and
hepatocyte growth factor-c-met axes and involves matrix metal-
loproteinases. Stem Cells 24(5):1254–1264
189. Song H, Stevens CF, Gage FH (2002) Astroglia induce neuro-
genesis from adult neural stem cells. Nature 417:39–44
190. Song L, Tuan RS (2004) Transdifferentiation potential of human
mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow. FASEB J 18
(9):980–982
191. Steinmets MP, Horn KP, Tom VJ, Miller JH, Busch SA, Nair D,
Silver DJ, Silver J (2005) Chronic enhancement of the intrinsic
growth capacity of sensory neurons combined with the degrada-
tion of inhibitory proteoglycans allows functional regeneration of
sensory axons through the dorsal root entry zone in the mamma-
lian spinal cord. J Neurosci 25:8066–8076
192. Storer PD, Dolbeare D, Houle JD (2003) Treatment of chronically
injured spinal cord with neurotrophic factors stimulates betaII-
tubulin and GAP-43 expression in rubrospinal tract neurons. J
Neurosci Res 74(4):502–511
193. Suda Y, Suzuki M, Ikawa Y, Aizawa S (1987) Mouse embryonic
stem cells exhibit indefinite proliferative potential. J Cell Physiol
133:197–201
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 309
194. Svendsen CN, Skepper J, Rosser AE, ter Borg MG, Tyres P,
Ryken T (1997) Restricted growth potential of rat neural precur-
sors as compared to mouse. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 99(2):253–
258
195. Svendsen CN, Bhattacharyya A, Tai YT (2001) Neurons from
stem cells: preventing an identity crisis. Nat Rev Neurosci 2
(11):831–834
196. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S (2006) Induction of pluripotent stem
cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by
defined factors. Cell 126(4):663–676
197. Talac R, Friedman JA, Moore MJ, Lu L, Jabbari E, Windebank
AJ, Currier BL, YaszemskiMJ (2004) Animalmodels of spinal cord
injury for evaluation of tissue engineering treatment strategies.
Biomaterials 25(9):1505–1510
198. Tang XQ, Cai J, Nelson KD, Peng XJ, Smith GM (2004) Func-
tional repair after dorsal root rhizotomy using nerve conduits and
neurotrophic molecules. Eur J Neurosci 20:1211–1218
199. Tate CM, Fishel ML, Holleran JL, Egorin MJ, Skalnik DG (2009)
Embryonic stem cells lacking the epigenetic regulator Cfp1 are
hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and exhibit decreased
Ape1/Ref-1 protein expression and endonuclease activity. DNA
Repair (Amst) 8(12):1411–1423
200. Teng YD, Lavik EB, Qu X, Park KI, Ourednik J, Zurakowski D,
Langer R, Snyder EY (2002) Functional recovery following traumat-
ic spinal cord injury mediated by a unique polymer scaffold seeded
with neural stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:3024–3029
201. Terasaka S, Iwasaki Y, Shinya N, Uchida T (2006) Fibrin glue
and polyglycolic acid nonwoven fabric as a biocompatible dural
substitute. Neurosurgery 58(suppl1):134–139
202. Tolar J, Nauta AJ, Osborn MJ, Panoskaltsis Mortari A, McElmurry
RT, Bell S, Xia L, ZhouN, RiddleM, Schroeder TM,Westendorf JJ,
McIvor RS, Hogendoorn PC, Szuhai K, Oseth L, Hirsch B, Yant
SR, Kay MA, Peister A, Prockop DJ, Fibbe WE, Blazar BR (2007)
Sarcoma derived from cultured mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cells
25(2):371–379
203. Mo T, Keirstead HS (2005) Spinal cord injury is accompanied by
chronic progressive demyelination. J CompNeurol 486(4):373–383
204. Tsuji O, Miura K, Okada Y, Fujiyoshi K, Mukaino M, Nagoshi N,
Kitamura K, Kumagai G, Nishino M, Tomisato S, Higashi H,
Nagai T, Katoh H, Kohda K, Matsuzaki Y, Yuzaki M, Ikeda E,
Toyama Y, Nakamura M, Yamanaka S, Okano H (2010) Thera-
peutic potential of appropriately evaluated safe-induced pluripo-
tent stem cells for spinal cord injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107(28):12704–12709
205. Tuszynski MH, Peterson DA, Ray J, Baird A, Nakahara Y, Gage
FH (1994) Fibroblasts genetically modified to produce nerve
growth factor induce robust neuritic ingrowth after grafting to
the spinal cord. Exp Neurol 126:1–14
206. Tuszynski MH, Murai K, Blesch A, Grill R, Miller I (1997)
Functional characterization of NGF-secreting cell grafts to the
acutely injured spinal cord. Cell Transplant 6:361–368
207. Tuszynski MH, Weidner N, McCormack M, Miller I, Powell H,
Conner J (1998) Grafts of genetically modified Schwann cells to
the spinal cord—survival, axon growth, and myelination. Cell
Transplant 7:187–196
208. Tuszynski MH, Gabriel K, Gerhardt K, Szollar S (1999) Human
spinal cord retains substantial structural mass in chronic stages
after injury. J Neurotrauma 16(6):523–531
209. Uccelli A, Mancardi G (2010) Stem cell transpaltation in multiple
sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol 23(3):218–225
210. Vaquero J, Zurita M, Oya S, Santos M (2006) Cell therapy using
bone marrow stromal cells in chronic paraplegic rats: systemic or
local administration? Neurosci Lett 398(1–2):129–134
211. Wang D, Gao L (2005) Proteomic analysis of neural differentiation
of mouse embryonic stem cells. Proteomics 5(17):4414–4426
212. Wang Y, Lapitsky Y, Kang CE, Shoichet MS (2009) Accelerated
release of a sparingly soluble drug from an injectable hyaluronan-
methylcellulose hydrogel. J Control Release 140(3):218–223
213. Wang G, Ao Q, Gong K, Zuo H, Gong Y, Zhang X (2010)
Synergistic effect of neural stem cells and olfactory ensheathing
cells on repair of adult rat spinal cord injury. Cell Transplant 19
(10):1325–1337
214. Wernig M, Tucker KL, Gornik V, Schneiders A, Buschwald R,
Wiestler OD, Barde YA, Brüstle O (2002) Tau EGFP embryonic
stem cells: an efficient tool for neuronal lineage selection and
transplantation. J Neurosci Res 69(6):918–924
215. Wernig M, Benninger F, Schmandt T, Rade M, Tucker KL,
Büssow H, Beck H, Brüstle O (2004) Functional integration of
embryonic stem cell-derived neurons in vivo. J Neurosci 24
(22):5258–5268
216. Wernig M, Zhao JP, Pruszak J, Hedlund E, Fu D, Soldner F,
Broccoli V, Constantine-Paton M, Isacson O, Jaenisch R (2008)
Neurons derived from reprogrammed fibroblasts functionally in-
tegrate into the fetal brain and improve symptoms of rats with
Parkinson's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(15):5856–
5861
217. Willerth SM, Arendas KJ, Gottlieb DI, Sakiyama-Elbert SE
(2006) Optimization of fibrin scaffolds for differentiation of
murine embryonic stem cells into neural lineage cells. Biomate-
rials 27(36):5990–6003
218. Willerth SM, Sakiyama-Elbert SE (2008) Cell therapy for spinal
cord regeneration. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 60(2):263–276
219. Winkler C, Fricker RA, Gates MA, Olsson M, Hammang JP,
Carpenter MK, Björklund A (1998) Incorporation and glial dif-
ferentiation of mouse EGF-responsive neural progenitor cells after
transplantation into the embryonic rat brain. Mol Cell Neurosci 11
(3):99–116
220. Wobus AM (2001) Potential of embryonic stem cells. Mol
Aspects Med 22(3):149–164
221. Woodbury D, Schwarz EJ, Prockop DJ, Black IB (2000) Adult rat
and human bone marrow stromal cells differentiate into neurons.
J Neurosci Res 61:364–370
222. Wurmser AE, Gage FH (2002) Stem cells: cell fusion causes
confusion. Nature 416:485–487
223. Wurmser AE, Nakashima K, Summers RG, Toni N, D'Amour
KA, Lie DC, Gage FH (2004) Cell fusion-independent differen-
tiation of neural stem cells to the endothelial lineage. Nature 430
(6997):350–356
224. Xu XM, Guenard V, Kleitman N, Bunge MB (1995) Axonal
regeneration into Schwann cell-seeded guidance channels grafted
into transected adult rat spinal cord. J Comp Neurol 351:145–160
225. Yamanaka S (2009) A fresh look at iPS cells. Cell 137(1):13–17
226. Yandava BD, Billinghurst LL, Snyder EY (1999) “Global” cell
replacement is feasible via neural stem cell transplantation—
evidence from the dysmyelinated shiverer mouse brain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 96:7029–7034
227. Yoon SH, Shim YS, Park YH, Chung JK, Nam JH, Kim MO,
Park HC, Park SR, Min BH, Kim EY, Choi BH, Park H, Ha Y
(2007) Complete spinal cord injury treatment using autologous
bone marrow cell transplantation and bone marrow stimulation
with granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor: phase I/
II clinical trial. Stem Cells 25(8):2066–2073
228. Zeng L, Rahrmann E, Hu Q, Lund T, Sandquist L, Felten M,
O'Brien TD, Zhang J, Verfaillie C (2006) Multipotent adult pro-
genitor cells from swine bone marrow. Stem Cells 24(11):2355–
2366
229. Zhang RL, Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Chopp M (2001) Proliferation
and differentiation of progenitor cells in the cortex and the sub-
ventricular zone in the adult rat after focal cerebral ischemia.
Neuroscience 105(1):33–41
310 Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311
230. Zhang YW, Denham J, Thies RS (2006) Oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells derived from human embryonic stem cells express
neurotrophic factors. Stem Cells Dev 15(6):943–952
231. Zhang X, Zeng Y, Zhang W, Wang J, Wu J, Li J (2007) Co-
transplantation of neural stem cells and NT-3-overexpressing
Schwann cells in transected spinal cord. J Neurotrauma 24
(12):1863–1877
232. Zhao LR, Duan WM, Reyes M, Keene CD, Verfaillie CM, Low
WC (2002) Human bone marrow stem cells exhibit neural phe-
notypes and ameliorate neurological deficits after grafting into the
ischemic brain of rats. Exp Neurol 174(1):11–20
233. Zhu W, Xu W, Jiang R, Qian H, Chen M, Hu J, Cao W, Han C,
Chen Y (2006) Mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone
marrow favor tumor cell growth in vivo. Exp Mol Pathol 80
(3):267–274
234. Zurita M, Otero L, Aguayo C, Bonilla C, Ferreira E, Parajón A,
Vaquero J (2010) Cell therapy for spinal cord repair: optimization
of biologic scaffolds for survival and neural differentiation of
human bone marrow stromal cells. Cytotherapy 12(4):522–237
Comments
Matthias Kirsch, Dresden, Germany
The manuscript reviews an important issue for the near future of
neurosurgical restorative approaches: the use of various stem cell types
for the treatment of spinal cord injury.
It is a timely overview and important to the neurosurgical community.
More than in any other experimental field in neurosurgery, restor-
ative therapies require multidisciplinary approaches—both for cooper-
ating scientists as well as for the experimental approaches. From the
recent literature, no single cell type, no single shot of cells±biomatrices
might be sufficient. Success seems to be waiting at the doorstep but
requires inflationary experimental preclinical work. Some of the many
difficulties for translating the current body of experimental preclinical
therapies seem to be as follows:
(a) The size of the clinically relevant lesions is many times bigger in
humans than in preclinical models. In humans, complete tissue remod-
eling is necessary, grafts need to be immediately vascularized to
prevent failure, and distances covered by axons are usually many times
longer compared to preclinical models. No efforts have been undertak-
en so far, to evaluate a critical lesion size amendable for a given kind of
therapy.
(b) Monitoring of restorative therapies might be difficult since
tissue changes cannot be analyzed in vivo as of today. We have no
means besides clinical outcome, which is the final parameter. Neuro-
radiological imaging does not support cellular resolution nor any
indication of secondary parameters of success such as vascularization,
axonal sprouting, and glial scarring.
(c) The most potent cell types, such as ES cells, might also present
the most dangerous cell type, if uncontrolled cell growth occurs. Only
very few preclinical setups implement fallback strategies, such as the
integration of suicide genes into transplanted cells in order to remove
these cells if the need occurs.
(d) To define achievable intermediate and final end points for
cellular replacements and for tissue regeneration.
The authors have succeeded in summarizing the many efforts in
cellular transplantation for spinal cord injury. As with most fascinating
scientific endeavors, new questions arise with every new achievement.
The authors have shown that a detailed understanding of developmen-
tal biology, tissue remodeling, tumor biology, biomaterial engineering,
and many more is necessary to advance spinal cord regenerative
therapies into the clinical setting.
Neurosurg Rev (2012) 35:293–311 311
