clinical implications of basic research
T h e  n e w  e ngl a nd  j o u r na l  o f  m e dic i n e
n engl j med 366;20 nejm.org may 17, 20121940
For the past couple of decades, clinicians have 
watched the stem-cell field with a mixture of an-
ticipation and skepticism. No group of patients 
has been more expectant than those with spinal 
cord injuries. Therapies for spinal cord injury 
have been promised almost since the dawning of 
the stem-cell field. The recent launch — and 
abrupt termination — of a phase 1 clinical trial 
for acute spinal cord injury by the biotechnology 
company Geron whetted the appetite, and then 
fueled the frustration, of these patients.
A recent study by Sakai et al.1 is one of a se-
ries in this field. It is important in that it em-
braces concepts that were first introduced a 
decade ago2: namely, that spinal cord injury is 
not a monolithic entity but rather a series of con-
current and interacting pathological processes3; 
that multimodal actions will be required to com-
bat the various facets of this malady; that stem 
cells, in fulfilling their fundamental teleologic 
role of maintaining homeostasis in a perturbed 
system, may be capable of intrinsically exerting 
many of these requisite multifaceted actions4; 
and that the stem cell may serve as the glue that 
bonds and focuses many of these multidiscipli-
nary approaches. The authors observed that im-
plantation of stem cells derived from human 
tooth pulp (a neural-crest derivative) into tran-
sected rat spinal cords led to functional improve-
ment by reducing the death of neurons and glia, 
preserving axons and myelin sheaths, promoting 
regeneration of transected axons by down-regu-
lating multiple growth inhibitors, and spurring 
the differentiation of stem cells into myelinating 
cells. Although such observations are not new 
to the neural stem-cell field, the appeal of the 
approach used by Sakai et al. lies in exploiting a 
stem-cell source that is both readily accessible 
from a living patient and is immunologically 
matched to the potential recipient, precluding the 
need for immunosuppressive drugs.
Although this study, like many in the field of 
spinal cord injury, is not without flaws, it provides 
an opportunity to coach clinicians (who can then 
inform their patients) about why research in 
spinal cord injury is so challenging. The cascade 
of pathological processes that characterize spinal 
cord injury unfolds in the context of a neuro-
anatomy that is complex, with connections and 
functions that have been rendered regionally dis-
crete within a span of millimeters, if not microns, 
during a finely tuned process that is part of em-
bryonic development. Despite attempts to stan-
dardize experimental models, procedures, read-
outs, and instruments, there can nevertheless be 
variability from animal to animal and investiga-
tor to investigator. The presence of spared fibers 
after transaction is often difficult to detect. Sub-
stantial degrees of spontaneous recovery that are 
not related to treatment can occur for reasons not 
entirely known or controllable. Certainly, much of 
this spontaneous recovery is attributable to the 
resolution of processes such as edema, inflam-
mation, altered perfusion, shock, and transient 
channelopathies. It is also probably due to grad-
ual behavioral compensation by the animal, re-
dundancy in connections, and the disinhibition 
of certain intraspinal reflexive movements (so-
called locomotion pattern generators5).
The field itself is inherently vulnerable to ob-
server bias because it lacks adequate varieties of 
truly objective, quantifiable, discrete measures of 
spinal function attributable purely to single path-
ways. Other confounders include related maladies 
(e.g., pain, bladder and bowel dysfunction, mus-
cle atrophy, osteopenia, skin breakdown, and 
fatigue); the unmonitored effects of learning, en-
vironmental stimulation, motivation, and rehabili-
tation; the effect of immunosuppressant drugs 
or use of experimental animals with immuno-
deficiency; the sex and strain of experimental 
animals; and in stem-cell transplantation, the 
Stem Cells and Spinal Cord Repair
Evan Y. Snyder, M.D., Ph.D., and Yang D. Teng, M.D., Ph.D.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO on September 1, 2014. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
n engl j med 366;20 nejm.org may 17, 2012 1941
clinical implications of basic research
fusion of donor cells with host cells, leading to 
the mistaken identification of a host cell as hav-
ing come from the graft.
In addition, the field is plagued by an incom-
plete knowledge of the relative contributions of 
the multiple pathological events that unfold af-
ter trauma and thus is poorly guided as to which 
processes should be combated in order to re-
store or preserve function. Although it is clear 
that the crux of spinal cord injury is the interrup-
tion of cortical involvement in spinal-mediated 
processes through ascending sensory and de-
InterventionPathology
Assessment
Induce sprouting of 
  preserved fibers
Produce myelinating cells
Induce growth cones 
  of axotomized fibers
Construct biosynthetic conduits
Create alternative circuits from
  short bridging interneurons
Prevent syrinx formation
Bridge gaps that arise
Provide trophic support
Detoxify milieu
Combat inflammation
Suppress scarring and inhibitors
  of neurite growth
Histology:
  Fiber integrity
  Myelin
  Donor and host cell types
Bladder and bowel control
Motor and sensory evoked potentials
Weight bearing
Movement
Sensory function or sensation
Electromyographic activity
Free radicals
Glutamate
Inflammation
Demyelination
Syrinx formation
Muscle
Motor
nerve
Stem cells
Stem
cells
Harness local intraspinal circuits
Axotomized
  fibers
Glial scar formation
  and gliosis zones
Figure 1. Approaches to Repairing Spinal Cord Injury.
The left side of the enlarged view of the spinal cord shows some of the multiple pathophysiological processes that unfold after acute 
injury. The right side of the cord illustrates some of the multiple ways in which implanted stem cells may have a favorable effect on these 
processes. Some strategies for assessing spinal function are also listed.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO on September 1, 2014. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
n engl j med 366;20 nejm.org may 17, 20121942
scending motor connections, it is far more 
daunting to re-create circuitry than to preserve 
the intricate connections established during em-
bryonic development. Interventions may be di-
rected at providing trophic support or neutraliz-
ing toxins to prevent the death or impairment of 
neural tissue from secondary injury processes3 
(e.g., excessive extracellular glutamate, inflamma-
tion, free radicals, ischemia, and impaired axo-
nal transport); redressing conduction deficits by 
protecting or regenerating myelin sheaths or in-
ducing the growth cones of axotomized fibers; 
suppressing scarring and inhibitors to neurite 
growth; preventing the formation of syrinx or 
bridging gaps; circumventing the injury through 
the promotion of alternative routes to the mus-
cles, including sprouting from preserved neural 
fibers, replacing long connections with multiple 
shorter ones created from interneurons, har-
nessing local circuits within the cord,5 and con-
structing biosynthetic conduits2; and re-creating 
a supportive niche, including adequate vascular-
ization (Fig. 1). Appealingly, the use of stem cells 
— in conjunction with other approaches — can 
mediate many of these therapeutic actions by 
virtue of the inherent biologic properties of such 
cells.2,4
Claims of functional advantage that has been 
gained by a given therapeutic intervention should 
be judged on the basis of a series of important 
questions (see box). There is a long route be-
tween concept and practice, along which these 
questions must be answered. Although the length 
of the route frustrates patients, clinicians, ven-
ture capitalists, and politicians, careful navigation 
of the steps will ultimately ensure both safety 
and meaningful, reproducible improvement. As 
to what constitutes improvement in a patient 
with spinal cord injury, the reacquisition of even 
one or two spinal segments of function can be 
life-changing. Finally, it must not be forgotten 
that most patients with spinal cord injury have 
been in a wheelchair for years. Interventions to 
treat chronic spinal cord injury, the “third rail” 
in neurorepair, are likely to be even more chal-
lenging. Indeed, interventions that seem promis-
ing for acute spinal cord injury tend to falter when 
applied, without modification, to the long-injured 
spinal cord.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
From the Sanford–Burnham Medical Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA (E.Y.S.); and the Department of Neurosurgery and De-
partment of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard 
Medical School, and the Division of Spinal Cord Injury Re-
search, Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System — both in 
Boston (Y.D.T.).
1. Sakai K, Yamamoto A, Matsubara K, et al. Human dental 
pulp-derived stem cells promote locomotor recovery after com-
plete transection of the rat spinal cord by multiple neuro-regen-
erative mechanisms. J Clin Invest 2012;122:80-90.
2. Teng YD, Lavik EB, Qu X, et al. Functional recovery follow-
ing traumatic spinal cord injury mediated by a unique polymer 
scaffold seeded with neural stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2002;99:3024-9.
3. Hulsebosch CE. Recent advances in pathophysiology and 
treatment of spinal cord injury. Adv Physiol Educ 2002;26:238-55.
4. Redmond DE Jr, Bjugstad KB, Teng YD, et al. Behavioral 
improvement in a primate Parkinson’s model is associated with 
multiple homeostatic effects of human neural stem cells. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:12175-80.
5. Courtine G, Song B, Roy RR, et al. Recovery of supraspinal 
control of stepping via indirect propriospinal relay connections 
after spinal cord injury. Nat Med 2008;14:69-74.
Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society.
clinical implications of basic research
Questions About Experimental Treatments  
for Spinal Cord Injury.
Were assessments of lesions, interventions, and 
other evaluations performed in a blinded fashion by 
multiple observers?
Were animals showing a rate of recovery that was 
too rapid for regeneration (or even rescue) or were le-
sions that were incorrectly staged eliminated from the 
data set?
Were observation periods carried out for at least  
4 months after the intervention?
Were the longitudinal fibers of the cord traced both 
before and after a lesion to distinguish preexisting (un-
severed) tracts versus recreated or reclaimed tracts?
Were the tracts or cells that were credited with re-
covery then removed experimentally to show that their 
elimination returned the animal to the pretreatment 
state? Was there plausible molecular, cellular, and his-
tologic evidence of a sufficiently robust regenerative 
process?
Were measures of open-field behavior analyzed with 
appropriate statistical rigor and an appreciation for the 
pitfalls of that type of assessment?
Were approaches other than open-field testing used 
to evaluate spinal function?
Were improvements in cortically recorded motor 
and sensory evoked potentials documented?
Are the results reproducible?
If transplanted cells are required, can they be isolat-
ed, characterized, and safely scaled up within a time-
frame that can produce an effect on a freshly injured 
 human spinal cord?
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO on September 1, 2014. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
