Development of a chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffold seeded
with amniotic epithelial cells to promote spinal cord repair
Hui Xue,1* Xiu-Ying Zhang,1,2* Jia-Mei Liu,1 Yu Song,1,3 Yi-Fan Li,4 Dong Chen5
1Department of Histology & Embryology, Bethune School of Medical Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130021,
People’s Republic of China
2Department of Fundamental Nursing, School of Nursing, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, People’s Republic of China
3Department of Anatomy, Changchun Medical College, Changchun 130021, People’s Republic of China
4Department of Anatomy, Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun 130021, People’s Republic of China
5Department of Histology & Embryology, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 523808, People’s Republic of China
Received 21 November 2011; revised 26 April 2012; accepted 1 June 2012
Published online 25 July 2012 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.34311
Abstract: Bridging strategies are essential for spinal cord repair
in order to provide a physical substrate allowing axons to grow
across the site of spinal cord lesions. In this study, we have
evaluated the therapeutic effects of adding amniotic epithelial
cells to a unidirectionally oriented acellular muscle scaffold and
have compared this with the effect of a scaffold alone. Chemi-
cally extracted acellular muscles, with or without amniotic epi-
thelial cells, were implanted into the lateral hemisected adult
rat thoracic spinal cord. Control rats were similarly injured. Af-
ter 4 weeks, the acellular muscle scaffolds were found to be
well integrated with the host tissue. The chemically extracted
acellular muscle scaffold seeded with amniotic epithelial cells
promoted axonal growth in a distinctly organized and linear
fashion, induced sprouting of calcitonin gene-related peptide
positive axons, and was not associated with an astrocyte
response. Compared with acellular muscle scaffolds alone, the
addition of amniotic epithelial cells further promoted the
remyelination of nerve fibers, sprouting of 5-hydroxytrypta-
mine nerve fibers, relays of cortical motor-evoked potential and
cortical somatosensory-evoked potential, and functional recov-
ery. All these data together suggest that co-implantation of
chemically extracted acellular muscle with amniotic epithelial
cells may constitute a valuable approach to study and/or de-
velop therapies for spinal cord injury. VC 2012 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part A: 101A: 145–156, 2013.
Key Words: acellular scaffold, amniotic epithelial cell, spinal
cord injury, nerve tissue engineering
How to cite this article: Xue H, Zhang X-Y, Liu J-M, Song Y, Li Y-F, Chen D. 2013. Development of a chemically extracted acellular
muscle scaffold seeded with amniotic epithelial cells to promote spinal cord repair. J Biomed Mater Res Part A 2013:101A:145–156.
INTRODUCTION
The mammalian spinal cord was previously believed to be
unable to regenerate after injury. This limited regenerative
capacity of the adult spinal cord has been attributed to a
host of inhibitory signals associated with the extracellular
environment and with the generally low intrinsic potential
of mature central nervous system neurons to regenerate.1
By addressing each of these intrinsic or extrinsic factors
individually, significant progress has been made in promot-
ing the growth of injured adult axons.2 These approaches
include the provision of supportive substrates,3,4 providing
neurotrophic factors to injured axons,5,6 and neutralizing in-
hibitory proteins at the site of injury.7,8 Within these
approaches, tissue engineering scaffolds are essential to pro-
vide a physical substrate allowing axons to grow across the
lesion site, because cavity formation and glial scars are im-
portant obstacles impeding regeneration after spinal cord
injury (SCI).
Extracellular matrix is the gold standard for tissue
regeneration. In recent years, various synthetic and natu-
rally derived materials, which aim to mimic native extracel-
lular matrix, have been used to construct spinal cord scaf-
folds and have provided promising results toward
improving the function of injured nervous tissue.9–11 Never-
theless, because these approaches have not provided the
ultimate nerve regeneration scaffold, it has been postulated
that further improvements are needed for all these reported
tissue engineering scaffolds in order to achieve a greater
resemblance to extracellular matrix. Such approaches have
included providing stimulatory cues12 and optimization of
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to: D. Chen; e-mail: nbumschendong@yahoo.com.cn or J.-M. Liu; e-mail: liujiamei100@yahoo.com.cn
Contract grant sponsor: Chinese National Natural Science Foundation; contract grant number: 30970739 (to D.C.)
Contract grant sponsor: Jilin Province Science Foundation; contract grant number: 20090726 (to J.-M.L)
VC 2012 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC. 145
scaffold internal architecture design.13 In contrast, acellular
scaffolds that directly bring the extracellular matrix of the
tissue or organ into the scaffold can effectively retain the
structural and functional proteins of extracellular matrix
and their original three-dimensional (3D) distribution. Previ-
ously, we tried to use acellular muscle as the bridging scaf-
fold for SCI and found that chemically extracted acellular
muscle grafts provided useful biomatrices to enhance axonal
sprouting and guide the sprouting axons in a distinctly
organized and linear fashion in the injured spinal cord.14
This method may help to guide sprouting axons into the spi-
nal cord distal to the lesion site and ultimately result in
effective reconnection of damaged axons with their target
neurons.
Cell transplantation has been employed as another strat-
egy to treat SCI. A wide range of cell types has been studied,
such as fibroblasts, astrocytes, Schwann cells, olfactory
ensheathing cells, bone marrow stromal cells, and amniotic
epithelial cells (AECs).15–17 Of these, the AEC has consider-
able advantageous characteristics that make it an attractive
material in the field of regenerative medicine.18 It has low
immunogenicity,19,20 has anti-inflammatory properties,21
and can be isolated without the sacrifice of human embryos.
Like embryonic stem cells, AECs retain stem cell characteris-
tics22 and have the potential to protect and replace dam-
aged neural cells, but with a lower risk of tumorigenesis.23
In addition, human AECs produce some neurotrophins such
as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotro-
phin (NT)-3.24 Previous work from our laboratory demon-
strates that AECs can promote neural differentiation of neu-
ral stem cells and neurite growth in vitro.25 All these
characteristics make the AEC a potential candidate for cell
transplantation in the treatment of SCI. However, there are
only few studies supporting this fact. In the present investi-
gation, we seeded AECs into the acellular muscle bridge
across the hemisected rat spinal cord. Our goal was to
fabricate an engineering scaffold with ideal regeneration
potential for SCI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Male Wistar rats (280–350 g) were purchased from the
experimental animal center of Jilin University. Animals were
housed in a standard cage and kept under standard labora-
tory conditions with the temperature at 22 6 2C and a
12–12 h light/dark cycle. Animal experiments related to
this study were approved by the Local Ethics Committee for
Animal Research at Jilin University and performed in
accordance with international standards for animal welfare.
All surgical procedures were performed under general anes-
thesia by intraperitoneal injection with 10% chloral hydrate.
Preparation of acellular muscle grafts
Adult Wistar rats were sacrificed by intraperitoneal
overdose with 60 mg/kg of chloral hydrate. The bundles of
paravertebral muscles were excised and longitudinally har-
vested. The preparation of the chemically extracted acellular
muscle was based on the procedures described in a previ-
ous publication.26 Briefly, the muscle segments were treated
with a series of detergent baths consisting of sodium do-
decyl sulfate (SDS; Sigma) and Triton X-100 (Sigma). All
steps were performed under constant stirring at 37C.
Following this, all samples were then sterilized using
50 mg/mL of ampicillin and stored in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS) at 4C until use.
After processing, cryostat sections of the acellular mus-
cle scaffolds were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and examined by light microscopy.
Moisture content of the acellular muscles
Six acellular muscle scaffolds were randomly chosen for the
measurement of the moisture content (MC). After removing
peripheral water by blotting, the wet weights (WW) of the
scaffolds were measured in Eppendorf tubes. Then, the scaf-
folds in Eppendorf tubes were completely dried at 37C for
24 h, and the dry weights (DW) of the scaffolds were meas-
ured. The moisture content was calculated with the follow-
ing equation: MC ¼ (WW  DW)/WW  100%.
Pore size of the acellular muscles
The average pore size of the scaffold was measured with
Image-Pro Plus 6. Five acellular muscle scaffolds were ran-
domly chosen. Two randomly chosen H&E-stained sections
from each scaffold were photographed under the micro-
scope. The diameters of 12 channels in each section were
measured with Image-Pro Plus 6. The mean value of diame-
ters was calculated.
AEC isolation and culture
Rat AECs were isolated from pregnant Wistar rats at gesta-
tional days 16–17 by the methods described before25 with
minor modification. In brief, uteri were excised, and the rat
amnion was mechanically peeled from the embryonic rats.
Then, the amniotic membranes were rinsed three times in
ice-cold Hanks’ solution and dissected into small pieces.
After that, they were digested in Hanks’ solution containing
0.125% trypsin for 7 min at room temperature. The
digested AECs were collected by centrifugation at 800 rpm
for 5 minutes and then cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, in
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37C. The
medium was changed every 2 days, and the cells were con-
fluent after 3 to 4 days.
Cell labeling and seeding
When AECs were grown to 80% confluence, they were
labeled by the Hoechst 33342 (5 mM; Sigma). After labeling,
the AECs were washed three times with PBS. They were
then trypsinized and resuspended in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium with 10% fetal calf serum at a density of 2 
106 viable cells/mL. The acellular muscle scaffold was
trimmed to proper size and 200 lL of the cell suspension
was introduced into multiple points of the scaffold with a
sample microinjector (Dingguo, Beijing, China).The cell-
seeded scaffolds were put into an Eppendorf tube in a
humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37C until use.
146 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
Spinal cord hemisection and transplantation
procedures
A total of 24 male Wistar rats were used in this study. They
were assigned to four groups (n ¼ 6/each): acellular muscle
group; amnion epithelial cell-seeded acellular muscle group;
lesion only group; and a sham operation group. The rats were
anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate solution (3.5 mL/kg).
A laminectomy was performed to expose the thoracic spinal
cord at T10. Iridectomy scissors were used to make a right
sided hemisection of the T10 thoracic spinal cord segment,
followed by the removal of a 2-mm block of the right-sided
spinal cord tissue. A fine surgical blade was used to repeat-
edly scrape along the ventral surface of the vertebral canal in
the lesional area to ensure that all lateral spinal tissue had
been severed. In the treatment groups, an AEC-seeded or con-
trol medium-injected acellular muscle graft was carefully
implanted into the cavity with its longitudinal axis parallel to
that of the spinal cord. A piece of silicone sheeting was placed
over the scaffold and dorsal surface of the cord to stabilize the
scaffold within the spinal cord. In the lesion control group, the
lesional cavity was left empty. The muscles and skin were
then sutured layer by layer in all the animals. The rats in the
sham operation group received only the laminectomy. All rats
were given extensive postoperative care including daily subcu-
taneous ampicillin (100 mg/kg) and gentamicin (12 mg/kg)
for a period of 1 week.
Behavioral testing
The hind limb locomotor function was analyzed using the
Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) open-field locomotor
test27 at days 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 after surgery. Because the
hind limb locomotor function on the left (unaffected side)
recovered quickly for the most rats (16 of 24 rats), only the
right (affected side) hind limb was ranked by two blinded
observers.
Electrophysiological analysis
At the end of the experiment, evoked potentials were recorded
to assess functional status of motor and sensory axonal con-
duction based on the method described before. Basically, fol-
lowing general anesthesia, the rats were placed into a stereo-
taxic frame. After exposure of the cerebral cortex and the
sciatic nerve in the right (affected side) hind limb, electrodes
from a BL-410E Data Acquisition Analysis System for Life Sci-
ence (Taimeng, Chengdou, China) were connected to the sciatic
nerve and cerebral cortex. The latency and amplitude of corti-
cal motor-evoked potential (CMEP) and cortical somatosen-
sory-evoked potentials (CSEP) were detected and recorded.
Tissue processing
After the electrophysiological analysis, all rats were deeply
anesthetized and intracardially perfused with 4% parafor-
maldehyde in PBS. The portion of the spinal cord containing
the injury and adjacent portions were removed and post-
fixed overnight in the same fixative. Then, the sample was
soaked overnight in 15% sucrose, followed by 30% sucrose,
and cut into 16-lm thick coronal sections using a cryostat.
All sections were stored at 20C until further use.
Immunofluorescence
The sections were treated with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-
100 for 30 min. Nonspecific antibody binding was blocked
with 10% normal goat serum in PBS plus 5% bovine serum
albumin in PBS for 1 h. Primary antibodies including neurofila-
ment (NF, a rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for neurofila-
ment in the neuronal axons; 1:400; Millipore), calcitonin gene-
related peptide (CGRP, a rabbit polyclonal antibody; 1:2000;
Milipore), 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, a rabbit polyclonal anti-
body; 1:100; Sigma), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, a
mouse monoclonal antibody specific for astrocytes; 1:100; Lab-
vision), and myelin basic protein (MBP, a mouse monoclonal
antibody specific for the myelin membrane in the central nerv-
ous system; 1:100; Chemicon) were applied for 12 h at 4C.
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated Goat anti-rabbit
(1:200; Jackson Immunoresearch Labs) or Cy3-conjugated goat
anti-mouse (1:400; Jackson Immunoresearch Labs) secondary
antibodies were used to visualize primary antibody binding.
For negative controls, the primary antibody was replaced by
PBS. After staining, the sections were observed under a fluo-
rescence microscope using standard fluorescent filters.
Quantification of axonal regeneration, myelinated
axons, and astrocytes
The method for quantification of astrocytes in spinal cord sec-
tions was developed from protocols described before.28,29 In
the lesion group, the area in tissue adjacent to the central cav-
ity was selected; in the treated groups, the area in tissue adja-
cent to but not including the graft area was selected. Positive
cells were quantified by identifying GFAP-positive area with
Image-Pro Plus, v. 6.0. All positive areas in six microscopic
high-power fields (400) for each section were averaged. Five
sections of each spinal cord at every 112 lm interval were
separately analyzed and averaged. The mean value from the
combined data of all six animals in each group was calculated.
Quantification of NF-positive axons, CGRP-positive axons,
and MBP-positive myelin sheaths within the graft was per-
formed using methods described elsewhere.12,30 Briefly, three
sections were randomly selected from each animal. The total
number of axons or myelin sheaths penetrating the scaffold was
quantified at six microscopic fields within each section at a
400 magnification. These quantified fields were distributed
within three regions of each scaffold: the rostral region (0.2–0.4
mm from rostral host–implant interface), middle region
(between 0.6 mm from rostral and 0.6 mm from caudal host–
implant interface), and caudal region (0.2 to 0.4 mm from caudal
host–implant interface). The mean number of axons or myelin
sheaths obtained from three sections of each animal was defined
as the number of axons or myelins. The number of axons or
myelin sheaths of six animals in each group was calculated.
Statistical analysis
All values are expressed as mean 6 SD. Data from BBB
score, electrophysiology, and histological results were ana-
lyzed for statistical differences between multiple groups
using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and between
two groups using Student’s t-test. If there was a significant
difference in the multiple groups, each of the two groups
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | JAN 2013 VOL 101A, ISSUE 1 147
was further analyzed by Student’s t-test. A p value of <0.05
was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Characteristics of acellular muscle scaffold
After chemical extraction, the acellular muscle scaffolds
appeared semitransparent, milkiness in color, and displayed
soft properties [Supporting Information Fig. 1(A)]. In the
chemically extracted acellular muscle scaffolds, all cell com-
ponents were completely removed, leaving uniaxial linear
channels arranged in a parallel pattern [Supporting Informa-
tion Fig. 1(B)]. The moisture content of the scaffolds was
91.4 6 6.8%. The average diameter of pores in the scaffolds
was 117.3 6 42.7 lm.
Purity of the rat AECs
After 2 h in culture, rat AECs began to attach to the bottom
of the culture flask. Adherent AECs were in polygonal shape
and showed several processes. To confirm the purity of
the rat AECs, the CK19 immune staining was performed.
The results showed that the most cells (96.7 6 2.3%) were
CK19 positive (Supporting Information Fig. 2).
Improvement of tissue repair and local environment
Four weeks after surgery, in the acellular muscle and AECs-
acellular muscle treated groups, H&E staining showed that
the scaffold had integrated well with the spinal cord and
formed a tissue bridge between the rostral and caudal
stumps of the spinal cord (Fig. 1). H&E staining results also
showed substantial host cell infiltration into both kinds of
scaffold. There was no difference in the cell density between
the two scaffolds. No scar tissue was found at the interface
between the scaffolds and spinal cord. In contrast, for the
lesion control group, there was a large cavity in the spinal
cord (Fig. 1). Hoechst 33342-labeled AECs were still present
in the scaffolds 4 weeks after transplantation (Fig. 2).
Nerve fiber sprouting and remyelination
The effect of scaffolds on neural fiber sprouting following SCI
was evaluated by NF staining analysis. NF immunohistochemical
FIGURE 1. Hematoxylin/eosin (H&E) staining of coronal sections from
each group. Images of representative sections from the chemically
extracted acellular muscle treated group (A) and the AEC-acellular
muscle treated group (B). The figures show that the scaffolds form tis-
sue bridges between the stumps of hemisected spinal cord. The scaf-
folds are infiltrated by numerous host cells and integrate well with the
host spinal cord. There are no fibrous scar at the interface between the
scaffold and spinal cord. The broken lines mark the borders between
the host spinal cords and grafts. C: Image of a section from the lesion
control group. Scale bars: 500 lm. [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 2. Hoechst 33342 labeled cells within the scaffold 4 weeks after
transplantation. Scale bars: A, 500 lm; a, 100 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
148 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
staining (Fig. 3) demonstrated an extensive axonal growth
into both the acellular muscle and the cell-seeded acellu-
lar muscle scaffolds 4 weeks postimplantation. The num-
ber of NF-positive nerve fibers was higher in the cell-
seeded acellular muscle group than in the acellular mus-
cle group (Fig. 4). However, the difference was not statis-
tically significant. More strikingly, the majority of sprout-
ing axons in both kinds of scaffold were distributed in a
distinctly organized and linear fashion. In the injured
group, no NF-positive nerve fibers were found in the
lesional cavity.
To assess whether primary sensory axons and raphespi-
nal axons grew in the scaffolds, CGRP and 5-HT immunohis-
tochemistry were performed. The sensory axons that immu-
nostained for CGRP were also found within the two kinds of
the implant [Fig. 5(A,B)]. There was no statistical difference
between the two treated groups [Fig. 5(C)]. However, for
raphespinal axons, there was a significant difference
between the two treated groups (Fig. 6). In the acellular
muscle scaffold group, serotonin (5-HT)-positive axons
stopped at the interface between the spinal cord and trans-
plant. But in the cell-seeded acellular muscle group, they
grew into the scaffold for a short distance.
The remyelination of the sprouting axons in the scaffolds
was visualized by MBP-positive staining. The staining results
FIGURE 3. Sprouting axons 28 days after surgery, NF immunofluorescent staining. A, b, and c: chemically extracted acellular muscle; D, e, and
f: AEC-acellular muscle; G, h, and i: lesion only. Note that the sprouting axons within the two types of scaffolds are distributed in a strikingly
parallel and linear manner. Dashed lines indicate scaffold borders. The triangles indicate the axons in the grafts (c and f) or in the spinal cord
adjacent to the injured cavity (i). The cell body-like structures are autofluorescent cells. Scale bars: A, D, and G, 300 lm; b, e, and h, 100 lm; c, f,
and i, 25 lm. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 4. The number of NF positive nerve fibers in the scaffolds or
at the injury site. *p < 0.05 versus the lesion control group. [Color fig-
ure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | JAN 2013 VOL 101A, ISSUE 1 149
showed that there were only a few myelinated axons in the
acellular muscle scaffolds [Fig. 7(A)]. In contrast, the number
of the myelinated axons in cell-seeded acellular muscle scaf-
folds increased dramatically [Fig. 7(B)]. The difference
between the two groups was statistically significant [Fig. 7(C)].
Astrocytic response
The glial scar formation was evaluated by the GFAP staining of
astrocytes. Immunofluorescence staining showed that reactive
astrocytes were present in all subjects at the host/lesion inter-
face (Fig. 8). This GFAP reactivity at the host/lesion interface
did not differ qualitatively between the groups with and with-
out scaffolds (Fig. 9). In the AECs-acellular muscle treated
group, some astrocytes penetrated into the scaffold in a linear
arrangement, parallel with the long axis of the scaffold (Fig. 8).
Functional recovery
Before surgery, all the rats showed normal locomotor per-
formance with BBB scores of 21. The right (affected side)
hind limb of the rats were completely paralyzed following
T10 spinal cord hemisection. While SCI control rats had no
FIGURE 5. CGRP-immunolabeled sensory axons in the grafts 28 days after surgery. Coronal spinal cord sections show CGRP-positive sensory
axons in the acellular muscle scaffold (A,a) and the acellular muscle scaffold with AECs injected during the implantation procedure (B,b). The
broken lines mark the borders between the host spinal cords and grafts. The arrows point to the CGRP-positive axons in the grafts. C: Shows
the numbers of CGRP positive axons within the two types of scaffolds. Scale bars: A and B, 250 lm; a and b, 100 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 6. Coronal spinal cord sections showing raphespinal axons
immunostained for serotonin (5-HT) at 4 weeks after SCI and follow-
ing transplantation of the acellular muscle scaffold (A,a) and the acel-
lular muscle scaffold seeded with AECs (B,b). The broken lines mark
the borders between the host spinal cords and grafts. The arrows
point to the serotonin-positive axons. Note that 5-HT axons penetrate
into the AECs-acellular muscle scaffold. Scale bars: A and B, 250 lm;
a and b, 100 lm. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue,
which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
150 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
recovery, hind limb function showed small degrees of
improvement in acellular muscle treated group, with the
mean score of AECs-acellular muscle treated group being
significantly higher than those of other groups (Fig. 10).
Electrophysiology
To further assess functional status of the severed spinal cord
following implantation treatment, the CMEP and CSEP were
measured. The data demonstrated that control rats with
spinal cord hemitransection alone showed negligible signal
level of both CMEPs and CSEPs (Fig. 11). Their latencies were
prolonged and amplitudes were significantly lower compare
with the normal control group (Tables I and II). But in the
acellular muscle scaffold group, there were discernible
recoveries in both the CMEP and CSEP compared with the SCI
control group. Intriguingly, the AECs-acellular muscle treated
group exhibited the highest degree of recovery in both laten-
cies and amplitudes of the CMEP and CSEP.
FIGURE 7. Sprouting myelinated nerve fibers in the chemically treated muscle (A,a) and the AECs-acellular muscle (B,b) 4 weeks after transplan-
tation, MBP-positive staining. The broken lines mark the border between the spinal cords and grafts. The triangles point to the myelinated nerve
fibers in the grafts. C: Shows the numbers of MBP positive myelinated axons within the two types of scaffolds. *Significant difference in the
numbers of MBP positive axons (p < 0.05, t-test). The cell body-like structures are autofluorescent cells. Scale bars: A and B, 200 lm; a and b,
50 lm. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | JAN 2013 VOL 101A, ISSUE 1 151
DISCUSSION
In this study, we found that chemically extracted acellular
muscle scaffolds seeded with AECs promoted axonal growth
in a distinctly organized and linear fashion. The addition of
AECs also promoted the remyelination of nerve fibers,
improved relays of CMEP and CSEP, and stimulated regener-
ation of 5-HT nerve fibers. To our knowledge, these charac-
teristics of AECs have not been tested before and suggest
new possibilities for their use in the treatment of SCI.
Cell transplantation is an important tool that can pro-
vide neurotrophic factors for stimulating the intrinsic
growth potential of injured neurons and/or to replace
FIGURE 8. GFAP-positive astrocyte responses in each group. A and a: GFAP-positive cells in the chemically extracted acellular muscle treated
group. B and b: GFAP-positive cells in the AECs-acellular muscle treated group. C and c: GFAP-positive cells in the lesion control group. The
broken lines mark the border between the spinal cords and grafts. Scale bars: A, B, and C, 200 lm; a, b, and c, 50 lm. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
152 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
damaged or dead neurons after SCI. Previous studies have
shown that grafting rat fetal spinal cord stem cells or pro-
genitor cells into rats after SCI leads to improved anatomic
growth/plasticity and functional recovery.31 However, wider
clinic use of fetal tissue comes against the double problem
of obtaining a large enough quantity of the donor tissues
and also of the ethical controversy surrounding the use of
human fetal tissues. The solution to overcome such practical
and ethical issues may lie in finding other tissue or cells to
replace the fetal tissue. AECs express surface markers nor-
mally present on embryonic stem and germ cells.22,32 In addi-
tion, AECs express the pluripotent stem cell-specific transcrip-
tion factors octamer-binding protein 4 and nanog,22 two
genes known to be required for self-renewal and pluripotency.
Correspondingly, the AECs can differentiate into all three
germ layers—endoderm (liver, pancreas), mesoderm (cardio-
myocytes), and ectoderm (neural cells) in vitro.22,33,34 In our
opinion, the AEC is one of the most promising cell candidates
for stem cell-based therapy in the treatment of SCI.
In this investigation, we limited our focus to the thera-
peutic properties of AECs on SCI. Compared with the acellu-
lar muscle group, cotransplantation of AECs and acellular
muscle better restored the function observed both physi-
cally and electrophysiologically in the hind limbs of treated
SCI rats and promoted the sprouting of 5-HT axons and
remyelination of sprouting axons. These data suggest that
AECs can promote axonal remyelination, the sprouting of 5-
HT axons, and functional recovery of SCI rats. This is in
agreement with the previous reports, which have shown the
capacity of AECs to promote the functional recovery of SCI
in monkeys.17 Our previous data35 have also shown that
AECs can promote the sprouting of NF-positive and CGRP-
positive axons. All these characteristics demonstrate that
AECs have high curative potential for the treatment of SCI.
The results of this study demonstrate that both acellular
and cell-seeded scaffolds can promote the sprouting of NF-
positive and CGRP-positive axons. There was no statistically
significant difference between these two treated groups
with regard to these axon numbers. In addition, 5-HT axons
penetrated only a short distance into the AEC-scaffold trans-
plant. Because there was only a small level of functional re-
covery in the acellular muscle group, the axonal sprouting
seems not to be the main reason for the better functional
recovery and the improved axonal conduction (CMEP and
CSEP) in the AEC-acellular muscle treated group. In con-
trast, the number of remyelinated axons in AEC-acellular
muscle treated group was significantly bigger than that of
the acellular muscle group. Previous reports have shown
that demyelination contributes to the dysfunction after trau-
matic SCI 36 and that remyelination of the denuded axons
can improve the axonal conduction and facilitate functional
recovery after SCI.37 Similar to these reports, the remyelina-
tion promoted by the addition of AECs may play critical
roles for the functional recovery and the enhanced axonal
conduction in the AEC-acellular muscle treated group.
In the internal part of the AEC-acellular muscle grafts,
we did not find neurons. This indicated that AECs did not
differentiate into neural lineage cells. Thus, it was less pos-
sible that the AECs make the myelin sheath within the scaf-
folds. Our previous study has shown that the rat AECs could
secrete NT-3 and BDNF.25 It has been shown that NT-3 and
BDNF could induce oligodendrocyte proliferation and myeli-
nation of regenerating axons after SCI.38 Thus, the neurotro-
phic function of the rat AECs seemed to be the main reason
for the remyelination in the AEC-acellular muscle treated
group.
FIGURE 9. A comparison of GFAP-positive area between each group
(n ¼ 6). There is no statistically significant difference in the GFAP-pos-
itive area between the groups. [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FIGURE 10. Comparison of BBB score of the affected side hind limb
locomotor function in spinal cord hemisected rats of different study
groups. ~p < 0.05 versus the lesion control group. *p < 0.05 versus the
chemically extracted acellular muscle treated group. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | JAN 2013 VOL 101A, ISSUE 1 153
SCI usually induces significant secondary neuronal
degeneration, and the chronic phase is characterized by the
development of cysts and formation of glial scar. These
structures can inhibit axonal regeneration, which cannot be
solved by cell transplantation alone. There are also some
major disadvantages for the implantation or injection of
cells alone. One is the limited cell survival after the proce-
dure, as implanted cells tend to desert the injury site.39
Another problem for the transplantation of cells alone is
their lack of 3D organization, typically resulting in random
directions of axonal growth in the lesion. As a result, it is
difficult for regenerating axons to be recruited for bridging
beyond the lesion.40 It may be possible that all these chal-
lenges can be solved by combining cell implants with the
appropriate scaffold.
Chemically extracted acellular muscle provides a useful
scaffold to combine with cell implants. Our recent study14
showed that this scaffold has multiple characteristics
FIGURE 11. Analyses of behavioral and electrophysiological results. Upper panel: a representative image of the hind limbs of a SCI rat trans-
planted with the AECs-acellular muscle. Note that affected side hind limb (arrow) shows the weight-supported plantar step (A). The SCI rat
treated only by acellular muscle shows the extensive movement of hip joint but no weight support step (arrow) (B). By contrast, the affected
side hind limb of a representative control SCI rat remain behind (arrow) (C). Middle and lower panels: comparison of the average amplitude of
CMEP (D) and CSEP (E) recorded in (a) the AECs-acellular muscle group, (b) acellular muscle alone, (c) SCI controls (note: negligible levels of
signal), and (d) sham-operated controls or (e) normal rat controls. There is a discernible difference between the SCI control outcomes and that
of the treated groups (a,b). The amplitude of CMEP and CSMP recovered best in the AECs-acellular muscle treated rats. [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
154 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
suitable for the treatment of spinal cord injuries. The acel-
lular muscle can fill and bridge the cavity after SCI. It has
good biocompatibility and integrates well with the host spi-
nal cord. More importantly, this scaffold can promote axo-
nal growth in a distinctly organized and linear fashion. In
this study, we found that the acellular muscle can promote
the growth of CGRP-positive axons. In the AEC-acellular
muscle treated group, the muscle scaffold can also guide
the sprouting axons in a controlled direction, indicating
that the acellular muscle can solve the problem of lacking
3D organization for cell implants. In addition, the data
showed that there were still a large number of Hoechst
33342-labeled AECs in the scaffolds 4 weeks after trans-
plantation. Our previous results showed that only few
Hoechst 33342-labeled AECs remained 2 weeks after
cotransplantation into spinal cord with gelatin sponge.35
This suggests the acellular muscle can prevent the AECs
from leaving the injury site. There are other properties
making the acellular muscle attractive for the treatment of
SCIs. For example, acellular muscle has very low immuno-
genicity, potentially allowing allografting or perhaps even
xenografting.41,42 In fact, the evidence that the freeze-
treated muscle or fresh muscle have been tested in clinical
practice for the repair of damaged nerves43 suggests that
chemically extracted acellular muscle may be safe for clini-
cal application.
There still are some potential technical issues in our ex-
perimental approach. It has been difficult for us to deter-
mine if the sprouting axons can migrate out from the scaf-
folds and into the distal stumps of the injured spinal cords.
To improve this, completely transected spinal cord injured
model and neuronal tract tracing techniques may need to
be tested. The use of Hoechst dye to prelabel the nuclei of
donor cells has the possibility that host uptake of this nu-
clear dye may occur. To prevent such potential contamina-
tion, we carefully washed the labeled cells. In addition, with
the our previous finding35 that only few Hoechst 33342-
labeled cells remained 2 weeks after cotransplantation with
gelatin sponges, we think that, to some extent, the Hoechst
33342-labeled results can reflect the survival of amnion
epithelial cells in the acellular muscle scaffolds.
CONCLUSIONS
Taking all these observations together, chemically extracted
acellular muscle seeded with AECs promoted axonal sprout-
ing, remyelination, and functional recovery after SCI. This
suggests the possibility that such an approach may become
a valuable therapeutic strategy for spinal cord repair.
REFERENCES
1. Benowitz LI, Yin Y. Combinatorial treatments for promoting axon
regeneration in the CNS: strategies for overcoming inhibitory sig-
nals and activating neurons’ intrinsic growth state. Dev Neurobiol
2007;67:1148–1165.
2. Blesch A, Tuszynski MH. Spinal cord injury: plasticity, regenera-
tion and the challenge of translational drug development. Trends
Neurosci 2009;32:41–47.
3. King VR, Henseler M, Brown RA, Priestley JV. Mats made from
fibronectin support oriented growth of axons in the damaged spi-
nal cord of the adult rat. Exp Neurol 2003;182:383–398.
4. Yoshii S, Oka M, Shima M, Akagi M, Taniguchi A. Bridging a spi-
nal cord defect using collagen filament. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
2003;28:2346–2351.
5. Blesch A, Tuszynski MH. Cellular GDNF delivery promotes growth
of motor and dorsal column sensory axons after partial and com-
plete spinal cord transections and induces remyelination. J Comp
Neurol 2003;467:403–417.
6. Bradbury EJ, Khemani S, Von R, King, Priestley JV, McMahon SB.
NT-3 promotes growth of lesioned adult rat sensory axons
ascending in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord. Eur J Neuro-
sci 1999;11:3873–3883.
7. Schnell L, Schwab ME. Axonal regeneration in the rat spinal cord
produced by an antibody against myelin-associated neurite
growth inhibitors. Nature 1990;343:269–272.
8. Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, King VR, Bennett GS, Patel PN,
Fawcett JW, McMahon SB. Chondroitinase ABC promotes func-
tional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 2002;416:636–640.
9. Nomura H, Tator CH, Shoichet MS. Bioengineered strategies for
spinal cord repair. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:496–507.
10. Subramanian A, Krishnan UM, Sethuraman S. Development of
biomaterial scaffold for nerve tissue engineering: Biomaterial
mediated neural regeneration. J Biomed Sci 2009;16:108.
11. Willerth SM, Sakiyama-Elbert SE. Approaches to neural tissue en-
gineering using scaffolds for drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2007;59:325–338.
12. Stokols S, Tuszynski MH. Freeze-dried agarose scaffolds with uni-
axial channels stimulate and guide linear axonal growth following
spinal cord injury. Biomaterials 2006;27:443–451.
13. Madigan NN, McMahon S, O’Brien T, Yaszemski MJ, Windebank
AJ. Current tissue engineering and novel therapeutic approaches
TABLE I. Comparison of the Amplitude and Latency of CMEP
Between Uninjured Normal Rats and Spinal Cord
Hemitransected Rats With Different Treatments
(n ¼ 6, x̄ 6 s)
Groups Amplitude (mV) Latency (mS)
Lesion group 0.24 6 0.08 4.5 6 0.53
Chemically extracted
acellular muscle group
1.59 6 0.09a 3.68 6 0.12a
Cell-seeded acellular
muscle group
2.84 6 0.18b 2.9 6 0.37b
Sham-operated group 21.6 6 4.9 2.01 6 0.02
Normal control group 23.3 6 4.6 2.02 6 0.02
One-way ANOVA followed by t-test:
a p < 0.05, versus lesion group.
b p < 0.05, versus lesion group and chemically extracted acellular
muscle group.
TABLE II. Comparison of the Amplitude and Latency of CSEP
Between Uninjured Normal Rats and Spinal Cord
Hemitransected Rats With Different Treatments
(n ¼ 6, x̄ 6 s)
Groups Amplitude (mV) Latency (mS)
Lesion group 0.32 6 0.16 4.05 6 0.16
Chemically extracted
acellular
muscle group
0.8 6 0.14a 3.64 6 0.13a
Cell-seeded acellular
muscle group
2.2 6 0.12b 2.92 6 0.1b
Sham-operated group 53.6 6 13.3 2.06 6 0.02
Normal control group 65.2 6 12.2 2.05 6 0.02
One-way ANOVA followed by t-test.
a p < 0.05, versus lesion group.
b p < 0.05, versus lesion group and chemically extracted acellular
muscle group.
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH A | JAN 2013 VOL 101A, ISSUE 1 155
to axonal regeneration following spinal cord injury using polymer
scaffolds. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2009;169:183–199.
14. Zhang X-Y, Xue H, Liu J-M, Chen D. Chemically extracted acellu-
lar muscle: a new potential scaffold for spinal cord injury repair. J
Biomed Mater Res A 2012;100A:578–587.
15. Jones LL, Oudega M, Bunge MB, Tuszynski MH. Neurotrophic fac-
tors, cellular bridges and gene therapy for spinal cord injury. J
Physiol 2001;533(Pt 1):83–89.
16. Plant GW, Christensen CL, Oudega M, Bunge MB. Delayed trans-
plantation of olfactory ensheathing glia promotes sparing/regen-
eration of supraspinal axons in the contused adult rat spinal cord.
J Neurotrauma 2003;20:1–16.
17. Sankar V, Muthusamy R. Role of human amniotic epithelial cell
transplantation in spinal cord injury repair research. Neuroscience
2003;118:11–17.
18. Diaz-Prado S, Muinos-Lopez E, Hermida-Gomez T, Cicione C,
Rendal-Vazquez ME, Fuentes-Boquete I, de Toro FJ, Blanco FJ.
Human amniotic membrane as an alternative source of stem cells
for regenerative medicine. Differentiation 2011;81:162–171.
19. Sakuragawa N, Tohyama J, Yamamoto H. Immunostaining of
human amniotic epithelial cells: possible use as a transgene car-
rier in gene therapy for inborn errors of metabolism. Cell Trans-
plant 1995;4:343–346.
20. Akle CA, Adinolfi M, Welsh KI, Leibowitz S, McColl I. Immunoge-
nicity of human amniotic epithelial cells after transplantation into
volunteers. Lancet 1981;2:1003–1005.
21. Toda A, Okabe M, Yoshida T, Nikaido T. The potential of amniotic
membrane/amnion-derived cells for regeneration of various tis-
sues. J Pharmacol Sci 2007;105:215–228.
22. Miki T, Lehmann T, Cai H, Stolz DB, Strom SC. Stem cell charac-
teristics of amniotic epithelial cells. Stem Cells 2005;23:1549–1559.
23. Chen Z, Lu XC, Shear DA, Dave JR, Davis AR, Evangelista CA,
Duffy D, Tortella FC. Synergism of human amnion-derived multi-
potent progenitor (AMP) cells and a collagen scaffold in promot-
ing brain wound recovery: pre-clinical studies in an experimental
model of penetrating ballistic-like brain injury. Brain Res 2011;
1368:71–81.
24. Uchida S, Inanaga Y, Kobayashi M, Hurukawa S, Araie M, Sakura-
gawa N. Neurotrophic function of conditioned medium from
human amniotic epithelial cells. J Neurosci Res 2000;62:585–590.
25. Meng XT, Chen D, Dong ZY, Liu JM. Enhanced neural differentia-
tion of neural stem cells and neurite growth by amniotic epithelial
cell co-culture. Cell Biol Int 2007;31:691–698.
26. Mligiliche N, Kitada M, Ide C. Grafting of detergent-denatured
skeletal muscles provides effective conduits for extension of
regenerating axons in the rat sciatic nerve. Arch Histol Cytol 2001;
64:29–36.
27. Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive and reliable
locomotor rating scale for open field testing in rats. J Neuro-
trauma 1995;12:1–21.
28. Taylor SJ, Rosenzweig ES, McDonald JW III, Sakiyama-Elbert SE.
Delivery of neurotrophin-3 from fibrin enhances neuronal fiber
sprouting after spinal cord injury. J Control Release 2006;113:
226–235.
29. Pan HC, Cheng FC, Lai SZ, Yang DY, Wang YC, Lee MS. Enhanced
regeneration in spinal cord injury by concomitant treatment with
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and neuronal stem cells. J
Clin Neurosci 2008;15:656–664.
30. Guo J, Su H, Zeng Y, Liang YX, Wong WM, Ellis-Behnke RG, So
KF, Wu W. Reknitting the injured spinal cord by self-assembling
peptide nanofiber scaffold. Nanomedicine 2007;3:311–321.
31. Nakamura M, Okano H, Toyama Y, Dai HN, Finn TP, Bregman BS.
Transplantation of embryonic spinal cord-derived neurospheres
support growth of supraspinal projections and functional recov-
ery after spinal cord injury in the neonatal rat. J Neurosci Res
2005;81:457–468.
32. Miki T, Mitamura K, Ross MA, Stolz DB, Strom SC. Identification
of stem cell marker-positive cells by immunofluorescence in term
human amnion. J Reprod Immunol 2007;75:91–96.
33. Marongiu F, Gramignoli R, Dorko K, Miki T, Ranade AR, Paola
Serra M, Doratiotto S, Sini M, Sharma S, Mitamura K, Sellaro TL,
Tahan V, Skvorak KJ, Ellis EC, Badylak SF, Davila JC, Hines R,
Laconi E, Strom SC. Hepatic differentiation of amniotic epithelial
cells. Hepatology 2011;53:1719–1729.
34. Shinya M, Komuro H, Saihara R, Urita Y, Kaneko M, Liu Y. Neural
differentiation potential of rat amniotic epithelial cells. Fetal
Pediatr Pathol 2010;29:133–143.
35. Li C, Xue H, Liu J-M, Zhang X-Y, Song Y, Wang J-C. Promotional
effects of amniotic epithelial cells on neural regeneration in spinal
cord hemisection-injured rats. J Jilin Univ (Med Ed) 2011;37:
202–206.
36. Cao Q, Zhang YP, Iannotti C, DeVries WH, Xu XM, Shields CB,
Whittemore SR. Functional and electrophysiological changes after
graded traumatic spinal cord injury in adult rat. Exp Neurol 2005;
191(suppl 1):S3–S16.
37. McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y, Liu S, Mickey SK, Turetsky D, Got-
tlieb DI, Choi DW. Transplanted embryonic stem cells survive, dif-
ferentiate and promote recovery in injured rat spinal cord. Nat
Med 1999;5:1410–1412.
38. McTigue DM, Horner PJ, Stokes BT, Gage FH. Neurotrophin-3 and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor induce oligodendrocyte prolifer-
ation and myelination of regenerating axons in the contused
adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 1998;18:5354–5365.
39. Rochkind S, Shahar A, Fliss D, El-Ani D, Astachov L, Hayon T,
Alon M, Zamostiano R, Ayalon O, Biton IE, Cohen Y, Halperin R,
Schneider D, Oron A, Nevo Z. Development of a tissue-engi-
neered composite implant for treating traumatic paraplegia in
rats. Eur Spine J 2006;15:234–245.
40. Gros T, Sakamoto JS, Blesch A, Havton LA, Tuszynski MH. Regen-
eration of long-tract axons through sites of spinal cord injury using
templated agarose scaffolds. Biomaterials 2010;31:6719–6729.
41. Kvist M, Sondell M, Kanje M, Dahlin LB. Regeneration in, and
properties of, extracted peripheral nerve allografts and xeno-
grafts. J Plast Surg Hand Surg 2011;45:122–128.
42. Fansa H, Schneider W, Wolf G, Keilhoff G. Host responses af-
ter acellular muscle basal lamina allografting used as a matrix
for tissue engineered nerve grafts1. Transplantation 2002;74:
381–387.
43. Houstava L, Dubovy P, Haninec P, Grim M. An alternative prepa-
ration of the acellular muscle graft for reconstruction of the
injured nerve—morphological and morphometric analysis. Ann
Anat 1999;181:275–281.
156 XUE ET AL. ACELLULAR MUSCLE AND AECS PROMOTE SPINAL CORD REPAIR
