na
Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen e.V., Axon Growth and Regeneration Group, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175 Bonn, Germany
Spinal cord and chronic dynamic degenerative and regenerative events of individual neurons after traumatic injury in the
living animal.
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Experimental
.e lIntroduction
The wiring and complex connections of neuronal pathways within
the mammalian central nervous system (CNS) have long been the sub-
ject of intense investigations in spinal cord research. Neuronal tracing
techniques constitute indispensable tools to study the development
and trajectories of axonal tracts, as well as the regeneration potential
Freeman, 2010). At the same time meningeal fibroblasts and astroglia,
as well as diverse immune cells infiltrate the lesion site and lead to
restructuring of the injured tissue and formation of a dense scar
(reviewed in Silver and Miller, 2004). The sequence and timing of
pathological as well as regenerative events can bemost reliably studied
in the natural environment of the affected neurons. Hence, progress in
understanding the underlying pathobiology of these complex eventsof axons after traumatic injury. Spinal cord in
cade of diverse pathological events: While pr
and do not regenerate upon injury, distal axon
calledWallerian degeneration (reviewed inW
⁎ Corresponding author. Fax: +49 228 43302 689.
E-mail address: frank.bradke@dzne.de (F. Bradke).
0014-4886/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.07.007. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . .
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Dorsal column
Dorsal root ganglion
Sensory neurons
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
The experimental procedure . . . .
Strengths of in vivo imaging . . . .
Limitations of in vivo imaging . . . .
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16Thy1-GFP miceSpinal cord injury
Spinal cord regenerationKeywords:
In vivo imaging chamber nowalso enables loa b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 16 May 2012
Revised 2 July 2012
Accepted 14 July 2012
Available online 24 July 2012
Upon spinal cord injury, severed axons and the surrounding tissue undergo a series of pathological changes,
including retraction of proximal axon ends, degeneration of distal axon ends and formation of a dense fibrotic
scar that inhibits regenerative axonal growth. Until recently it was technically challenging to study these dynamic
events in the mammalian central nervous system. Here, we describe and discuss the recently established genetic
tract tracing approach of in vivo imaging. This technique allows studying acute pathological events following a spi-
nal cord lesion. In addition, the novel development of chronic spinal cord preparations such as the implanted spinal
ng-term imaging studies. Hence, in vivo imaging allows the direct observation of acuteReview
In vivo imaging
A dynamic imaging approach to study spi
Claudia J. Laskowski, Frank Bradke ⁎
j ourna l homepage: wwwjury (SCI) leads to a cas-
oximal axon ends retract
ends undergo a process
aller, 1850; Coleman and
rights reserved.l cord regeneration
Neurology
sev ie r .com/ locate /yexnralso depends on our ability to image individual neurons.
Classical tracing approaches are useful applications for examining
anatomical relationships between various brain regions and characteriz-
ing the architecture of arborizations and synaptology of axon terminals.
However, there are some limitations in using these approaches for the
assessment of axonal regeneration after SCI (reviewed by Kobbert et
al., 2000; Raju and Smith, 2006; Schofield, 2008): (1) Classical tracing
techniques are generally “static” end-point experiments, where each an-
imal provides only one piece of data. The adequate interpretation and
analysis of the data end-points must be deduced by comparing the indi-
vidual static images. (2) The tracer application requires complex surgery
and extensive expertise from the scientist, potentially introducing
new variables and complicating subsequent interpretation of the data.
(3) The tracing of specific neuronal pathways may be incomplete or er-
roneous. For example, variability in amount and location of dye injec-
tion can lead to variations in the number of labeled fibers (Bareyre et
al., 2005; Joosten et al., 1987; Steward et al., 2004). Some common
tracers such as cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) and biotinylated dextran
amines (BDA) can erroneously be taken up by fibers of passage, which
have been damaged as a consequence of the dye injection (Brandt and
Apkarian, 1992; Reiner et al., 2000). (4) Finally, using classical tracing
approaches it is technically more demanding to label and follow single
nerve fibers. Even though classical tracing techniques as well as reduc-
tive approaches, such as cell culture studies have provided useful insights
into understanding axonal pathobiology after SCI, the necessity for the
development of more innovative and dynamic imaging approaches in
vivowas inevitable.
As one of the first examples of in vivo imaging, the genetic tract
tracing technique developed by Kerschensteiner et al. (2005) allows
the in situ observation and analysis of lesioned axons at the single cell
level in their natural habitat. A single structure is followed over time
andmultiple data points are obtained fromone animal. Hence, interpre-
tation of data is easier to infer, since the pathological eventsmay direct-
ly be observedwhile they are happening in the living animal. Therefore,
limitations and caveats of in vivo imaging. Finally, we suggest potential
future applications of this technique.
The experimental procedure
In this section, we delineate the principal steps to perform an in vivo
imaging experiment. This description is important for understanding
the main strengths and limitations of this technique addressed in the
respective sections of this review. A basic setup for in vivo imaging is
depicted in Fig. 1. However, the setup is versatile and can be easilymod-
ified and customized to meet the particular researcher's needs.
Among the most useful mouse models for in vivo imaging are trans-
genicmice expressingfluorescent proteins under the control of the pro-
moter Thy1 (Feng et al., 2000). Thy1 is an immunoglobulin superfamily
member expressed by projection neurons throughout the nervous sys-
tem, aswell as by several non-neuronal cell types, including thymocytes
(Gordon et al., 1987;Morris, 1985). Deletion of a particular intron selec-
tively inhibits expression in non-neuronal tissue (Vidal et al., 1990) and
makes Thy1 a neuron-specific promoter. Taking this to their advantage,
Sanes and colleagues generated 25 independent transgenic lines express-
ing at least one of four fluorescent proteins termed XFPs (yellow [YFP],
green [GFP], red [RFP] and cyan [CFP] fluorescent protein) in the nervous
system in a unique pattern (Feng et al., 2000). The diversity of the labeled
neuronal subsets in the obtained lineswas attributed to differences in the
integration pattern and/or copy number of the neuron-specific XFP trans-
gene. Among the lines generated, “low-expressing” lines such as GFP-M
and GFP-S are most suited for in vivo imaging. In these lines, GFP expres-
an u
rosc
itor
12 C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17in vivo imaging enables direct observation of dynamic degenerative and
regenerative processes after traumatic injury and constitutes a unique
tool to unravel the events underlying spinal cord pathology. In the fu-
ture, in vivo imaging will help to gain insight into how neurons in the
nervous system change in relation to behavioral adaptations, experi-
ence and especially pathological events such as SCI.
In this review we aim to describe and discuss this dynamic imag-
ing technique. First, we delineate how a basic in vivo imaging experi-
ment is implemented in practice. Second, we discuss the strengths of
in vivo imaging and illustrate the necessity for its development in addi-
tion to conventional tracing approaches. We then address the current
Fig. 1. The basic experimental setup for in vivo imaging. The imaging setup consists of (A)
and white CCD camera (XM-10, Olympus), (C) a computer controlled fluorescence mic
(Cellsens®, Olympus). (E) A temperature controller and heating pad are required to mon
laboratory animal anesthesia system (VetEquip) is used to induce and maintain the anesthesiasion is only driven in a small percentage (1–10%) of sensory dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) neurons. Hence, single axons at the surface of the surgi-
cally exposed dorsal column can be directly observed after SCI using sim-
plewide-field epifluorescencemicroscopy (Fig. 2) (Kerschensteiner et al.,
2005). These genetically traced axons are superior to surgically or virally
delivered fluorescent tracers, because the fluorescent proteins are pro-
duced continuously, there is no undesired immunological response and
cell-type specificity is stable over generations.
In vivo imaging is usually performed on adult mice (8–16 weeks).
After induction of anesthesia, the mice are kept on a heating pad to
maintain a constant body temperature. Efficient ventilation, anesthesia
pright wide-field epifluorescence microscope (MVX10Macroview, Olympus), (B) a black
ope light source (X-Cite 120PC Q) and (D) the corresponding digital imaging software
the animal's body temperature (ATC 1000, World Precision Instruments). (F) A table top
.
tebr
ls ap
4 h
13C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17and analgesia are monitored constantly. Next, the lamina is removed at
lumbar level 1 (L1) of the spinal cord to expose the dorsal column, i.e. the
central axons of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons that have their
peripheral axons bundled within the sciatic nerve. Alternatively, a
laminectomymay be performed at any other spinal cord level (cervical,
thoracic or lumbar) provided that the spinal cord is even in this region.
In other words, a laminectomywithin the rostrocaudal curvature of the
mouse spinal cord should be avoided. To obtain the optimal fluorescence
signal the layer of dura mater covering the spinal cord should be re-
moved at the site of laminectomy. A needle or fine iridectomy scissors
may then be used to carefully transect single or groups of superficial
axons in the dorsal columns on either side of the prominent dorsal vein
(Fig. 2). Due to the occasional presence of minor blood vessels at the le-
sion site, transection can lead to small bleedings. However, these bleed-
ings can generally be stopped with cotton tipped applicators and do not
alter the regeneration behavior of the axons (Erturk et al., 2007;
Laskowski and Bradke, unpublished results). At this point, a potential
pharmacological substance can be directly administered onto the spinal
cord (Erturk et al., 2007) or an osmotic pump can be implanted intra-
thecally (e.g.White et al., 2008). Before and after induction of an injury
(and treatment) the transected axons are imaged. Most dorsal column
axons, which originate from the DRGs, run in parallel to the dorsal spi-
nal cord surface. The superficial fraction of sensory axons can thus easily
be imaged using conventional wide-field epifluorescence microscopy
and deep tissue penetration microscopy is not required. However, the
use of two-photon laser scanning microscopy does have clear benefits,
including reduced phototoxicity, deeper tissue penetration and greater
spatial resolution than conventional wide-field epifluorescencemicros-
copy (reviewed in Denk et al., 1990). Alternatively, the two-photon
laser beam can be used to micro-ablate single axons. In this approach
Fig. 2. Dorsal column of a Thy1-GFP mouse exposed by laminectomy of the lumbar ver
dorsal column and then running in parallel to the surface of the spinal cord. Blood vesse
axons bifurcate and enter the dorsal column. One axon was imaged (B) before and (C)the dura mater does not have to be removed and the small lesion will
only lead tominor scarring (Ylera et al., 2009). Furthermore, if performing
a real-time imaging experiment (as opposed to repetitive imaging ses-
sions), it is critical to maintain physiological temperatures and pH-levels
in the environment of the superficial axons being imaged. This is possible
by continuously superfusing the spinal cordwith aphysiological saline so-
lution or artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) pre-warmed to 35–37 °C.
After imaging, the lamina is closed with surrounding muscle tissue and
the skin stapled until the next imaging time point. Post-surgery, the ani-
mals are revived and kept in their home cages on a heating pad for
some days. They are further supplemented with physiological saline or
glucose solution to prevent dehydration and treated with antibiotics
and analgesics for the following week.
Strengths of in vivo imaging
In vivo imaging is a dynamic imaging approach, in which a single
structure, for instance a severed axon, can be followed over time.Dynamic approaches can be subdivided into two categories: continu-
ous real-time imaging and repetitive imaging. While the former ap-
proach is most suited to study acute pathological events directly
after SCI with high temporal resolution, the latter approach allows
the analysis of changes that extend over a longer time frame
(>1 day). Compared to static techniques, both dynamic approaches
allow easier interpretation of data and reconstruction of the main
pathological steps, because the key events may be directly observed
while they are happening in the living animal. This is most important,
since SCI is not a fully synchronized and reproducible event andwill not
show the identical time course in every single animal. Hence, adequate
temporal resolution as given by in vivo imagingwill contribute to clarify-
ing mechanistic aspects and causative relationships in SCI.
A fundamental advantage of in vivo imaging over conventional
tracing approaches is the direct visualization and confirmation of ax-
onal transection (Fig. 3). It is possible to unequivocally differentiate
between axonal fibers and sprouts that regenerated from transected
axons and fibers that were spared by the original lesion. In addition,
the evaluation of therapeutic interventions becomes more direct and
reliable using in vivo imaging. For instance, it is possible to distinguish
between drug effects, that protect the axon and thus inhibit degeneration
and/or that increase regeneration directly. Bothmechanismsmay eventu-
ally result in enhanced regeneration across the lesion site (Fig. 4). In static
imaging approaches, only the final outcome becomes apparent: regener-
ation of axonal fibers across the lesion site. The mechanism of the treat-
ment remains elusive.
In general, in vivo imaging is most suited to examine acute effects
taking place within the first days after SCI. Long-term observations
are technically more demanding due to the gradual formation of a fi-
brotic scar at the site of the laminectomy. Therefore, the recent advent
a 1. (A) Low magnification view of fluorescent dorsal root ganglion axons entering the
pear black. (B, C) Higher magnification views of (A). The dorsal roots of single sensory
after transection (asterisk). Scale bars, (A) 500 μm and (B, C) 200 μm.of novel strategies that permit themonitoring of regeneration overweeks
andmonthswill be of great importance in spinal cord research. Dray et al.
(2009) imaged the spinal cord for up to 4 months by protecting the spinal
cordwith a thick layer of agarose prior to resuturing the animal. Similarly,
in a second study (Di Maio et al., 2011) the laminectomy area was tightly
covered by applying a piece of thin synthetic matrix membrane over the
exposed cord and dura after each imaging time-point. In addition, the
membrane was stabilized with a layer of artificial dura that covered the
entire laminectomy site. Hence, scarring accumulated on the membrane
rather than on the dura surface. As a result, the authors identified and
followed single dorsal root axons over time-periods of up to 140 days.
While these recent advances allow imaging the spinal cord over
longer time-points, the described approaches are still limited by the
necessity for repeated surgical procedures to regain optical access to
the relevant tissue under investigation. Repeated surgeries increase the
risk of infection and inflammation, may cause additional tissue damage
and lastly, may cause pain and distress to the animal. Inevitably, these
factors also rule out the possibility of using these animals in behavioral
Fig. 3. In vivo imaging allows direct visualization and confirmation of axonal transection. (A) Schematic illustration of a Thy1-GFP mouse spinal cord. Sensory axons can be identified
by entry into the spinal cord through a dorsal root and branching (arrow) into a descending and an ascending branch. The axons then run in parallel to the spinal cord surface and
can be imaged using conventional wide-field epifluorescence microscopy. (B) Dorsal column lesion generally results in severing as well as sparing of fibers. Transected fluorescent
mag
th
14 C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17studies. To date, cranial window preparations that provide continuous
optical access to the rodent brain are already widely used in the field
(e.g. Holtmaat et al., 2009). However, development of chronic glass win-
sensory axons can be unequivocally distinguished from spared fibers using dynamic i
proaches, in vivo imaging also allows to discriminate between (C) regenerative outgrowdows for the spinal cord is complicated by the fact that the spinal cord –
compared to the cranium – is not rigid and needs to remain flexible.
At the same time, chronic spinal cord implants need to preserve the
Fig. 4. In vivo imaging is a dynamic approach to study axonal regeneration. (A) Direct visual
the axonal pathobiology before and after treatment. Information about the therapeutic mechanis
transected nerve fibers and thus decrease axonal degeneration in the first place or (C) it can pos
potentially result in enhanced regeneration (D). In static imaging approaches, by contrast, only
causative mechanism of the treatment (B and C) remains elusive.mechanical stability of the spine, whileminimizingmotion artifacts due
to breathing and heartbeat.
In spite of these associated difficulties, two independent research
ing approaches such as in vivo imaging. As opposed to static end-point imaging ap-
from transected axons and (D) compensatory sprouting from spared fibers.groups recently developed chronic preparations for the spinal cord
(Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012). Both manuscripts include
comprehensive protocols and illustrations of the surgical procedure.
ization of axonal transection and subsequent repetitive imaging enable investigation of
ms can thus be inferred using in vivo imaging: (B) A particular treatmentmay either protect
itively act on axonal endbulbs after antecedent degeneration events. Both mechanisms may
the final outcome (D) is apparent: regeneration of axonal fibers across the lesion site. The
15C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17In short, in the first approach by Farrar et al., muscle tissue and ten-
dons were carefully removed from the dorsal laminae of the thoracic
vertebrae T11 through T13. The three vertebrae were then fused by
clamping themon either sidewith smallmetal bars. Subsequently, a dor-
sal laminectomy was performed at thoracic level 12 without removal of
the dura mater. The bone was then sealed using a combination of cya-
noacrylate and dental acrylic. Next, a top plate was attached to the
metal bars. A silicone elastomer was applied over the spinal cord, and
the chamber sealed by a glass coverslip on top. Finally, the skin was
glued to the base of the top metal-plate. During imaging sessions, the
spines were stabilized and the mice elevated off the surgical table to
minimize artifacts caused bybreathing of the animal. Forweeks after in-
jury, the animals did not show any apparent signs of spinal or vertebral
damage and behaved normally as assessed by two independent tests of
locomotor function. In addition, the axonmorphologywas stable for pe-
riods of up to 8 weeks of imaging. Solely, amild inflammation at the site
of laminectomywas observed. In comparison to a laser injury of the spinal
cord though, this inflammatory response is many orders of magnitude
smaller and should not interfere with regeneration studies. However, in
spite of leaving the dura intact, the authors reported that the image con-
trast and lateral resolution diminished over time owing to a gradual fi-
brous growth over the surface of the spinal cord. Due to this fibrosis,
duration of imaging times between individual animals varied from as lit-
tle as 5 days to asmany as 140 days with 13 imaging sessions. In animals
where fibrous growth was dense, axons could not be resolved appropri-
ately at any depth. In those animalswithminimal fibrosis (approximately
50% of all animals) axons were imaged for more than 5 weeks and imag-
ing depth was limited to 30–50 μmusing two‐photon laser scanning mi-
croscopy. In occasionally myelin-poor regions between adjacent dorsal
roots however, imagingwas possible up to 300 μmin depth, allowing im-
aging of regions well into the dorsal horn. Despite the apparent advan-
tages, the approach by Farrar et al. requires sophisticated custom made
implantation materials and surgical apparatus. Hence, a second group
(Fenrich et al., 2012) developed an effective, low cost and high through-
put method for implantation of glass windows into the spinal cord. In
short, the muscles covering the spinous and transverse processes of the
thoracic vertebra 12 (T12) through lumbar vertebra 2 (L2) were resected
and the animals suspended froma spinal-fork stereotaxic apparatus. Prior
to surgery standard stapleswere shaped, sterilized and placed to fit close-
ly along the sides of the pedicles of the exposed vertebrae. The staples
were then glued into place with cyanoacrylate and served as anchoring
points for the glass window setup. A laminectomy was performed with-
out damage to the dura mater. A line of liquid silicone elastomer was
applied to the surface of the spinal cord, and a glass windowwas imme-
diately placed on top so that the glass rested on the edges of the bone
and was flat relative to the spinal cord. Then cyanoacrylate was applied
to the surrounding bone and muscle. Finally, a layer of dental cement
was applied over the cyanoacrylate to stabilize the setup. For imaging
with two‐photon laser scanning microscopy, animals were connected
to a clamp by the embedded paperclip. Using this approach, the mice
were highly mobile after surgery, showed no signs of distress and con-
tinued to gain weight throughout the experiment. Furthermore, the
implanted glass window per se improved overall image quality by re-
ducing the rostrocaudal curvature of the spinal cord and the amplitude
of respiratory and cardiac movement artifacts. Despite the gradual for-
mation of a thin vascular tissue layer between the window and the spi-
nal cord, the authors reported that high imaging quality was preserved
throughout the experiment duration. Fenrich et al. imaged the spinal cord
at sub-cellular resolution for up to 350 days, and 22 imaging sessions.
Moreover, using this approach the success rate was raised to 86% at two
weeks after implantation and to 77% at five weeks after implantation.
In summary both approaches require only a single surgery, and en-
able high imaging frequency and long imaging duration over time. In ad-
dition, the spinal cord implants do not interfere with normal behavior,
such as locomotion, grooming and rearing of the animals. This provides
the great opportunity to studynot only the disease dynamics and putativeresponses to therapeutic agents at the cellular level, but also the direct
assessment and correlation of the potential behavioral outcome in the
animals.
In addition to the development of these novel long-term imaging
strategies it is possible to complement in vivo imaging with classical
post-mortem analyses. At any time point after SCI, the animals can
be perfused and prepared for immunohistochemistry. This is feasible
since the fluorescence signal of the GFP positive axonal structures is
maintained both in live and paraformaldehyde-fixed tissue (Feng et
al., 2000). Thereby, the severed axons and the local environment in
which the observed axonal changes took place can be reexamined up
to months after dynamic imaging. In addition, the observed dynamic
changes may be correlated with ultrastructural changes by processing
the tissue for electron microscopy (e.g. Di Maio et al., 2011; Erturk et
al., 2007).
Limitations of in vivo imaging
Despite its numerous advantages, in vivo imaging is a fairly novel
approach with diverse procedural limitations. The introduction of fur-
ther technical refinements as well as the continuous development of
modern microscopy approaches will steadily improve this technique
and finally overcome the major drawbacks. Until then, some limita-
tions which are inherent to in vivo imaging as well as limitations com-
mon to both in vivo imaging and classical tracing techniques need to
be considered while interpreting data.
One general limitation of using mice as model system for SCI is
their inherent regeneration capability and their small size in comparison
to bigger or more slowly regenerating species (reviewed in Griffin et al.,
2010). These characteristics inevitably limit the spatial and temporal res-
olution in regeneration studies using mice as model system and particu-
lar care needs to be dedicated to the correct placement of the lesion and
timing of consecutive outgrowth measurements. Additionally, strain di-
versity is likely to have substantial effects on the regeneration behavior
ofmice (e.g. Basso et al., 2006). The differing regenerative and behavioral
responses to SCI suggest that inherent genetic factors influence recov-
ery and need to be considered in studies with inbred or genetically
engineered mouse strains.
A prerequisite for performing a reliable in vivo imaging experiment is
extensive expertise of the experimenter in spinal cord surgery and imag-
ing tominimize investigator-induced effects. Prolonged anesthesia of the
animal typical for real-time experiments, the surgical procedure itself,
phototoxicity and the risk of infection during imaging sessions constitute
potential stressors for the nervous system. Moreover, in vivo imaging is
complicated by anatomical variations and absence of reliable and re-
current anatomical reference points between individual animals. This
makes it challenging to consistently identify and place the lesion at
the same location of the spinal cord in different animals. In addition,
the extent of the lesion (depth and width of the injury) needs to be
standardized to minimize variability in the results.
In addition to the described investigator-induced changes, interpre-
tive pitfalls can also affect the outcome and reliability of an in vivo imag-
ing study.Most importantly, skewing of geometrical relationships of the
tissue due to changes in orientation of the animal complicates the find-
ing and imaging of the same region of the spinal cord during consecu-
tive imaging sessions. Finding stable landmarks, first for imaging and
later for reliably quantifying axonal outgrowth, thus poses a challenge
for in vivo imaging. Most suitable for this purpose are prominent blood
vessels or easily identifiable axonal branches and trajectories. However,
spinal cord tissue gradually changes over time following a traumatic le-
sion. Often, next to formation of a scar, smaller blood vessels are degraded
and newblood vessels appear. Changes in the labeling due to bleaching of
the fluorescence signal, degeneration or regenerative growth of axonal
structuresmay also affect the appearance of the tissue under observation.
Finally, alterations caused by an animal's breathing, pulse or muscle con-
tractions during imaging can also lead to image distortion and therefore
ticles may have undesired effects on the immune system of the host,
which could potentially affect the experimental results and interpreta-
16 C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17artifacts in the data. These temporal changes necessitate the development
of a registration method to align image sequences for later identification
and quantification of axonal outgrowth. Until then, measurements of re-
generative axonal outgrowth using in vivo imaging may contain slight
variability in the data.
A further drawback of in vivo imaging is its limited applicability in
diverse SCI paradigms and imaging of specific tracts. To date, in vivo
imaging is most convenient to study the regenerative behavior of
sensory axons running within 30–50 μm in depth of the most super-
ficial layer of the dorsal columns. At best, two‐photon laser scanning
microscopy can increase the imaging depth to a couple of hundred
μm in depth. This provides that the fibrous growth over the exposed
spinal cord is minimal and that the amount of light-scatteringmyelin
is relatively low. Moreover, to obtain adequate image quality and
resolution over a considerable amount of time it is important that
the lesions performed are relatively small, ideally affecting only
few axonal fibers. If larger lesions like contusion, transection or
hemisection are performed, massive bleeding and tissue damage will
occur. In the case of a hemisection or transection the dura is usually re-
moved. Therefore the bleedingmay be controlled and the tissue cleared
for imaging by superfusing the site of laminectomywith artificial CSF or
saline solution. As a result, in vivo imaging is applicable even for larger
lesion paradigms, bearing in mind that only the superficial layers of
the dorsal column may be imaged. However, in a more clinically rele-
vant injury model like contusion the dura mater is generally left intact.
Therefore, blood, intraparenchymal cells and axonal debris will spread
under the dura andmake imaging virtually impossible. Also problemat-
ic for in vivo imaging is the gradual formation of a fibrotic scar after large
lesions. While in the acute phase after a large lesion imaging is still fea-
sible, at later time points (>3 days) the resolution and image quality
will decrease to a pointwhere imaging is no longer possible. In addition,
in large lesion paradigms the inflammatory and immune response will
be considerably higher than in small lesions and needs to be taken
into account. In conclusion, large lesion paradigms are probably
most suited for in vivo imaging in studies with intent to analyze the ef-
fect of the immune response on axonal regeneration, as well as for stud-
ies that require dynamic data from in vivo imaging to be supplemented
with data from deeper tissue layers, such as the corticospinal tract
(CST) for example.
Lastly, the choice of the transgenic mouse line needs to be recon-
sidered in large lesions. Given the small amount of fibers likely to regen-
erate after large lesions, the use of mouse lines such as YFP.H or GFP.H –
which express a fluorophore in up to 80% of their sensory fibers – may
be more appropriate. However, if too many axons are labeled, it will
be increasingly difficult to follow the trajectories of single degenerating
or regenerating fibers. To this end, the development of novel clearing
and subsequent three-dimensional (3D) imaging techniques of fixed
spinal cord tissue could be helpful (Erturk et al., 2012). They enable
the visualization of trajectories of regenerating axons throughout
the entire depth of the spinal cord by rendering the tissue transparent,
without the need for time intense tissue sectioning. Thus, clearing and
3D-imaging of deeper layers of spinal cord tissue could supplement
dynamic in vivo imaging data and contribute to assessing the success
of experimental therapies in SCI.
Perspectives
To this point, regeneration studies of the mammalian CNS have been
dominated by static end-point measurements. New model systems of
spinal cord regenerationwill increasingly complement these established
models. In particular, dynamic imaging approaches like in vivo imaging,
that are adapted to observe and assess pathological events following
SCI while they are occurring in the living animal will be of great value.
Most importantly, in vivo imagingmay nowbe applied tomonitor injured
axons for extended periods of time (weeks to months) by employing
advanced techniques such as multi-photon microscopy and chroniction of data. Hence, one of the most exciting novel tools to manipulate
gene expression inmice with high spatiotemporal control is in vivo elec-
troporation of adult sensory neurons (Saijilafu et al., 2011). Using this
novel approach the authors electroporated fluorescent constructs into
sensory neurons and showed that the transfected genes start to be
expressed within a few hours after electroporation. In addition, different
constructs were electroporated into two independent dorsal root gangli-
ons (DRGs) of the same animal. This allows both control and experimen-
tal groups to be included in the same animal. Hence, the throughput is
increased, due to the reduced number of animals needed in a study
and the easy availability of expression constructs or siRNA/shRNA on
the market. Finally, the expression level of fluorescent proteins in single
nerve fibers is high enough to use this technique for in vivo imaging
(Laskowski and Bradke, unpublished results). Taken together, thismeth-
od will serve as a powerful tool to genetically dissect axon regeneration
in the living animal.
With the advent of conditional technology, genetic axonal label-
ing and in vivo imaging of injured axons, mouse models continue to
have a prominent role in dissecting the complex molecular cascades
following SCI. Nonetheless, the development of rat models that ex-
press genetically encoded indicators may turn out to be of even
greater importance, since histology and immunohistochemistry
have shown significant differences in the SCI neuropathology be-
tween the two species. While mice show accumulation of a dense fi-
brous connective tissue that fills the lesion site (Inman and Steward,
2003), SCI in rats results in large cystic cavities that extend rostral
and caudal to the initial injury site (e.g. Stokes and Jakeman, 2002).
The greater physiological similarity of rat and human SCI pathology
and the larger size of rats in comparison to mouse models allow for
more reliable manipulations and use in a variety of complex surgical
paradigms such as SCI (Jakeman et al., 2001). However, the lack of
tools available to manipulate the rat genome had slowed the use of
this animal model so far. Foremost, the introduction of a novel
Thy1-GFP rat model whose axons constitutively express GFP and which
was originally introduced to study facial nerve regeneration (Magill et
al., 2010),will prove to be apowerful translational tool for diverse SCI par-
adigms. In addition, it will be intriguing to see whether in vivo DRG elec-
troporation and subsequent in vivo imaging of the rat spinal cord might
also be feasible.
Together, the recent advances in genetically encoded indicators
and microscopy techniques allow capturing key neuronal events as
they take place in their native habitat. Thus, dynamic imaging
approaches like in vivo imaging provide a powerful testing ground
for results from molecular investigations and classical tracing
approaches.
Acknowledgments
We thank Robert Schorner from the Max Planck Institute of Neu-
robiology in Martinsried (Germany) and Kerstin Landwehr for their
assistance with the graphical work. This work was supported by the
Deutsche Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen and the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. C.L. is a student of the International
Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Life Sciences inpreparations like the spinal chamber or spinal cord glass window
(Farrar et al., 2012; Fenrich et al., 2012).
In addition, manipulation of gene expression in the nervous system
of a living animal will be important to unravel the role of specific genes
in spinal cord regeneration. So far, inducible knockout approaches using
the Cre recombinase and acute virus-based gene delivery have been
successfully used tomodulate gene expression. However, thesemethods
are expensive and involve labor-intensive processes.Moreover, viral par-Munich (Germany).
References
Bareyre, F.M., Kerschensteiner, M., Misgeld, T., Sanes, J.R., 2005. Transgenic labeling of
the corticospinal tract for monitoring axonal responses to spinal cord injury. Nat.
Med. 11, 1355–1360.
Basso, D.M., Fisher, L.C., Anderson, A.J., Jakeman, L.B., McTigue, D.M., Popovich, P.G.,
2006. Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in recovery after spinal
cord injury in five common mouse strains. J. Neurotrauma 23, 635–659.
Brandt, H.M., Apkarian, A.V., 1992. Biotin-dextran: a sensitive anterograde tracer for
neuroanatomic studies in rat and monkey. J. Neurosci. Methods 45, 35–40.
Coleman, M.P., Freeman, M.R., 2010. Wallerian degeneration, wld(s), and nmnat. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 33, 245–267.
Denk, W., Strickler, J.H., Webb, W.W., 1990. Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence
microscopy. Science 248, 73–76.
Di Maio, A., Skuba, A., Himes, B.T., Bhagat, S.L., Hyun, J.K., Tessler, A., Bishop, D., Son, Y.J.,
2011. In vivo imaging of dorsal root regeneration: rapid immobilization and pre-
synaptic differentiation at the CNS/PNS border. J. Neurosci. 31, 4569–4582.
Dray, C., Rougon, G., Debarbieux, F., 2009. Quantitative analysis by in vivo imaging of
the dynamics of vascular and axonal networks in injured mouse spinal cord.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 9459–9464.
Erturk, A., Hellal, F., Enes, J., Bradke, F., 2007. Disorganized microtubules underlie the
formation of retraction bulbs and the failure of axonal regeneration. J. Neurosci.
27, 9169–9180.
Erturk, A., Mauch, C.P., Hellal, F., Forstner, F., Keck, T., Becker, K., Jahrling, N., Steffens,
H., Richter, M., Hubener, M., Kramer, E., Kirchhoff, F., Dodt, H.U., Bradke, F., 2012.
Three-dimensional imaging of the unsectioned adult spinal cord to assess axon re-
generation and glial responses after injury. Nat. Med. 18, 166–171.
Farrar, M.J., Bernstein, I.M., Schlafer, D.H., Cleland, T.A., Fetcho, J.R., Schaffer, C.B., 2012.
Chronic in vivo imaging in the mouse spinal cord using an implanted chamber. Nat.
Methods 9, 297–302.
Feng, G., Mellor, R.H., Bernstein, M., Keller-Peck, C., Nguyen, Q.T., Wallace, M.,
Nerbonne, J.M., Lichtman, J.W., Sanes, J.R., 2000. Imaging neuronal subsets in trans-
genic mice expressing multiple spectral variants of GFP. Neuron 28, 41–51.
Fenrich, K.K., Weber, P., Hocine, M., Zalc, M., Rougon, G., Debarbieux, F., 2012. Long-term in
vivo imaging of normal and pathological mouse spinal cord with sub-cellular resolution
using implanted glass windows. J. Physiol. "Epub ahead of print" on May 28.
Gordon, J.W., Chesa, P.G., Nishimura, H., Rettig, W.J., Maccari, J.E., Endo, T., Seravalli, E.,
Seki, T., Silver, J., 1987. Regulation of Thy-1 gene expression in transgenic mice. Cell
term, high-resolution imaging in the mouse neocortex through a chronic cranial
window. Nat. Protoc. 4, 1128–1144.
Inman, D.M., Steward, O., 2003. Physical size does not determine the unique histo-
pathological response seen in the injured mouse spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma
20, 33–42.
Jakeman, L.B., Ma, M., Stokes, B.T., 2001. Considering the use of transgenic mice in spinal
cord research. In: Marwah, J., et al. (Ed.), Traumatic CNS Injury. Prominent Press,
Scottsdale, pp. 180–201.
Joosten, E.A., Gribnau, A.A., Dederen, P.J., 1987. An anterograde tracer study of the de-
veloping corticospinal tract in the rat: three components. Brain Res. 433, 121–130.
Kerschensteiner, M., Schwab, M.E., Lichtman, J.W., Misgeld, T., 2005. In vivo imaging of
axonal degeneration and regeneration in the injured spinal cord. Nat. Med. 11,
572–577.
Kobbert, C., Apps, R., Bechmann, I., Lanciego, J.L., Mey, J., Thanos, S., 2000. Current con-
cepts in neuroanatomical tracing. Prog. Neurobiol. 62, 327–351.
Magill, C.K., Moore, A.M., Borschel, G.H., Mackinnon, S.E., 2010. A newmodel for facial nerve
research: the novel transgenic Thy1-GFP rat. Arch. Facial Plast. Surg. 12, 315–320.
Morris, R., 1985. Thy-1 in developing nervous tissue. Dev. Neurosci. 7, 133–160.
Raju, D.V., Smith, Y., 2006. Anterograde axonal tract tracing. Curr. Protoc. Neurosci.
2006 Nov; Chapter 1:Unit 1.14.
Reiner, A., Veenman, C.L., Medina, L., Jiao, Y., Del Mar, N., Honig, M.G., 2000. Pathway
tracing using biotinylated dextran amines. J. Neurosci. Methods 103, 23–37.
Saijilafu, Hur E.M., Zhou, F.Q., 2011. Genetic dissection of axon regeneration via in vivo
electroporation of adult mouse sensory neurons. Nat. Commun. 2, 543.
Schofield, B.R., 2008. Retrograde axonal tracing with fluorescent markers. Curr. Protoc.
Neurosci. 2008 Apr; Chapter 1:Unit 1.17.
Silver, J., Miller, J.H., 2004. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 146–156.
Steward, O., Zheng, B., Ho, C., Anderson, K., Tessier-Lavigne, M., 2004. The dorsolateral
corticospinal tract in mice: an alternative route for corticospinal input to caudal
segments following dorsal column lesions. J. Comp. Neurol. 472, 463–477.
Stokes, B.T., Jakeman, L.B., 2002. Experimental modelling of human spinal cord injury: a
model that crosses the species barrier and mimics the spectrum of human cytopa-
thology. Spinal Cord 40, 101–109.
Vidal, M., Morris, R., Grosveld, F., Spanopoulou, E., 1990. Tissue-specific control elements
of the Thy-1 gene. EMBO J. 9, 833–840.
Waller, A., 1850. Experiments on the section of the glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal
nerves of the frog, and observations of the alterations produced thereby in the
structure of their primitive fibres. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 140, 423–429.
White, R.E., Yin, F.Q., Jakeman, L.B., 2008. TGF-alpha increases astrocyte invasion and
promotes axonal growth into the lesion following spinal cord injury in mice. Exp.
17C.J. Laskowski, F. Bradke / Experimental Neurology 242 (2013) 11–17Holtmaat, A., Bonhoeffer, T., Chow, D.K., Chuckowree, J., De Paola, V., Hofer, S.B.,
Hubener, M., Keck, T., Knott, G., Lee, W.C., Mostany, R., Mrsic-Flogel, T.D., Nedivi,
E., Portera-Cailliau, C., Svoboda, K., Trachtenberg, J.T., Wilbrecht, L., 2009. Long-Neurol. 214, 10–24.
Ylera, B., Erturk, A., Hellal, F., Nadrigny, F., Hurtado, A., Tahirovic, S., Oudega, M., Kirchhoff,
F., Bradke, F., 2009. Chronically CNS-injured adult sensory neurons gain regenerative
competence upon a lesion of their peripheral axon. Curr. Biol. 19, 930–936.50, 445–452.
Griffin, J.W., Pan, B., Polley, M.A., Hoffman, P.N., Farah, M.H., 2010. Measuring nerve re-
generation in the mouse. Exp. Neurol. 223, 60–71.
