FULL PAPER Surgery
Comparison of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Derived from Fat, Bone Marrow, Wharton’s 
Jelly, and Umbilical Cord Blood for Treating Spinal Cord Injuries in Dogs
Hak-Hyun RYU1), Byung-Jae KANG1), Sung-Su PARK1), Yongsun KIM1), Gyu-Jin SUNG1), Heung-Myong WOO2)#,  
Wan Hee KIM1) and Oh-Kyeong KWEON1)*#
1)Department of Veterinary Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Daehak-dong, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 
151–742, Korea
2)College of Veterinary Medicine and KNU Stem Cell Institute, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200–701, Korea
(Received 13 February 2012/Accepted 26 July 2012/Published online in J-STAGE 9 August 2012)
ABSTRACT. Previous animal studies have shown that transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into spinal cord lesions enhances 
axonal regeneration and promotes functional recovery. We isolated the MSCs derived from fat, bone marrow, Wharton’s jelly and umbili-
cal cord blood (UCB) positive for MSC markers and negative for hematopoietic cell markers. Their effects on the regeneration of injured 
canine spinal cords were compared. Spinal cord injury was induced by balloon catheter compression. Dogs with injured spinal cords were 
treated with only matrigel or matrigel mixed with each type of MSCs. Olby and modified Tarlov scores, immunohistochemistry, ELISA 
and Western blot analysis were used to evaluate the therapeutic effects. The different MSC groups showed significant improvements in 
locomotion at 8 weeks after transplantation (P<0.05). This recovery was accompanied by increased numbers of surviving neuron and 
neurofilament-positive fibers in the lesion site. Compared to the control, the lesion sizes were smaller, and fewer microglia and reactive 
astrocytes were found in the spinal cord epicenter of all MSC groups. Although there were no significant differences in functional recov-
ery among the MSCs groups, UCB-derived MSCs (UCSCs) induced more nerve regeneration and anti-inflammation activity (P<0.05). 
Transplanted MSCs survived for 8 weeks and reduced IL-6 and COX-2 levels, which may have promoted neuronal regeneration in the 
spinal cord. Our data suggest that transplantation of MSCs promotes functional recovery after SCI. Furthermore, application of UCSCs 
led to more nerve regeneration, neuroprotection and less inflammation compared to other MSCs.
KEY WORD: canine, mesenchymal stem cell, spinal cord injury, transplantation.
doi: 10.1292/jvms.12-0065; J. Vet. Med. Sci. 74(12): 1617–1630, 2012
Following spinal cord injury (SCI), macrophage and 
microglial infiltration induces progressive tissue cavitation 
or glial cyst formation [11]. Reactive astrogliosis results in 
a glial scar that contains a deposition of dense collagenous 
extracellular matrix which inhibits axonal and cellular mi-
gration [44]. The endogenous capacity of the spinal cord 
to repair itself and regenerate is thought to be limited after 
SCI [12, 53]. Therefore, therapeutic strategies that involve 
exogenous cell replacement should be considered. Stem cell 
transplantation has recently been identified as a potential 
therapeutic modality for treating SCI [1, 2]. Adult mesen-
chymal stem cells (MSCs) exert neuroprotective effects 
through putative mechanisms including secretion of nerve 
regeneration factors and transdifferentiation [8]. Treatment 
of SCI using MSCs derived from adipose tissue [19, 36], 
bone marrow (BM) [38], Wharton’s jelly (WJ) [52] and 
umbilical cord blood (UCB) [8] has been studied. Char-
acterization [50] and neural differentiation capacities [41] 
of various MSCs have been investigated using FACS and 
differentiation test in vitro, respectively. However, in vivo 
studies comparing the effects of MSCs on nerve regenera-
tion and functional recovery according to the origin of the 
cells have not been performed.
In this study, we transplanted MSCs derived from 
adipose tissue, BM, WJ and UCB mixed with matrigel into 
dogs with SCI. The purpose of this study was to (1) exam-
ine whether the transplanted MSCs can promote functional 
recovery of the hind-limbs and prevent inflammation and 
glial scarring, (2) identify which MSCs are more effective 
for neuro-protection and -regeneration, and (3) determine 
whether matrigel may act as a cellular bridge at the injury 
site.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
MSC isolation and culturing: Canine MSCs were ob-
tained from gluteal subcutaneous fat, BM aspirates, WJ and 
UCB. The procedures were used based on protocols previ-
ously described [36, 40].
Adipose tissue was aseptically collected from subcutane-
ous fat in the hip of a 2-year-old dog under anesthesia. Fat 
tissues were washed extensively with PBS (Gibco, Billings, 
MT, U.S.A.), minced and digested with 1 mg/ml collagenase 
type I (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A.) at 37°C for 1 hr 
with intermittent shaking. The digested tissue was filtered 
through 100 µm nylon mesh and centrifuged at 200 g for 
10 min. Pellet cells including stem cells were resuspended 
with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco) 
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco). 
*CorrespondenCe to: Kweon, O.-K., Department of Veterinary 
Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National Univer-
sity, Daehak-dong, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151–742, Korea.
 e-mail: ohkweon@snu.ac.kr
# Equal contribution.
©2012 The Japanese Society of Veterinary Science
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1618
Resuspended cells were plated in T75 flasks and incubated 
overnight at 37°C with 5% humidified CO2. Unattached 
cells were removed after 24 hr by washing with PBS, and 
the medium was replaced every 48 hr until the cells became 
confluent. When cells were >90% confluent, they were 
banked with banking solution (DMEM supplemented with 
10% DMSO and 20% FBS) or subcultured.
BM was aseptically collected in heparinized tubes from 
the humeral bone of a 2-year-old dog under anesthesia. 
The marrow was diluted 1:1 with PBS. A Ficoll-Paque Plus 
(Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden) density gradient 
was used to collect the buffy coat layer. The diluted marrow 
was gently placed on Ficoll-Paque solution and centrifuged 
at 400 g for 20 min. The isolated marrow stromal cells were 
washed with PBS and centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min.
Fresh canine umbilical cords were obtained from dogs that 
underwent a Cesarean section and stored in Hanks’ balanced 
salt solution (HBSS; Gibco) at 4°C. Following disinfection 
in 70% ethanol for 30 sec, the umbilical cord vessels were 
removed while still in HBSS. The mesenchymal tissue in WJ 
was then minced into pieces of about 20 mm3 in size and 
centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min. After the supernatant was 
removed by aspiration, the precipitate was treated with col-
lagenase type I (1 mg/ml) at 37°C for 12 hr, washed and 
further digested with 2.5% trypsin (Gibco) at 37°C for 30 
min. FBS was then added to the mesenchymal tissue to halt 
trypsinization.
Low-density mononuclear cells were isolated from UCB 
using a Ficoll-Plaque Plus density gradient. The diluted UCB 
was gently placed on Ficoll-Paque solution and centrifuged 
at 400 g for 20 min. Cells were then washed with PBS and 
centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min.
Pellet cells collected from BM, WJ and UCB were incu-
bated in media for 24 hr and unattached cells were removed 
and cultured as described in adipose tissue.
Flow cytometry analysis: The cells were stained with fluo-
rescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated antibodies against 
CD14 (clone CAM36A; VMRD, Pullman, WA, U.S.A.), 
CD34 (clone 1H6; Serotec, Kidlington, U.K.), CD45 (clone 
CADO18A; VMRD) and CD105 (clone SN6; Serotec). The 
cells were also stained with phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated 
antibodies against CD44 (clone IM7; Abcam, Cambridge, 
U.K.), CD73 (clone 7G2; Abcam) and CD90 (clone DH2A; 
VMRD). Expression of the corresponding cell surface mark-
ers was measured by FACS Calibur (Becton, Dickinson and 
Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ, U.S.A.) using CELL Quest Pro 
(Becton, Dickinson and Co.) software.
Osteogenic differentiation: MSCs were cultured in osteo-
genic medium composed of low-glucose DMEM supple-
mented with 10% FBS, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.), 0.1 µM dexamethasone 
(Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 µM ascorbic acid-2-phosphate 
(Sigma-Aldrich) for 14 days. Osteogenic differentiation 
was evaluated by calcium mineralization. Alizarin red S was 
used to determine the presence of calcium [32].
Adipogenic differentiation: MSCs were cultured in low-
glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and when 
cells were >80% confluent, then switched to adipogenic me-
dium [DMEM low-glucose medium with 10% FBS, 10 µg/
ml insulin (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 µM dexamethasone (Sigma-
Aldrich), 0.2 mM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 
mM isobutyl-methylxanthine (Sigma-Aldrich)] for 3 days. 
The cells were then grown in DMEM low-glucose medium 
with 10% FBS and 10 µg/ml insulin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4 
days. This procedure repeated twice for 14 days based on 
previous study [36]. The accumulation of neutral lipids was 
detected by staining the MSCs in a solution containing 0.5% 
Oil red O.
Neuronal differentiation: To induce neuronal differentia-
tion, we exposed MSCs to a cocktail of induction agents as 
previously described [37]. To initiate neuronal differen-
tiation, cells were washed with PBS and neuronal induction 
medium (NIM) consisting of serum-free DMEM with butyl-
ated hydroxyanisole (BHA; 200 µM), KCl (5 mM), valproic 
acid (2 mM), forskolin (10 µM), hydrocortisone (1 µM) 
and insulin (5 µg/ml). All MSCs were cultured for 3 days 
in NIM. Neuronal differentiation was assessed by neuronal 
morphology, and the expression of glia-, neuron- and oli-
godendrocyte-specific markers was also analyzed. The cells 
were stained with antibodies specific for glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (sc-6170; GFAP, 1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 
Santa Cruz, CA, U.S.A.), galactosylceramidase (sc-67352; 
GALC, 1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), neuronal nuclear 
antigen (ab77315; NeuN, 1:200; Abcam) and neurofilament 
160 (N5364; NF160, 1:200; Sigma-Aldrich). The cells were 
then stained with secondary anti-mouse Fluor 594 and anti-
rabbit Fluor 594 (Invitrogen) antibodies. The cells were also 
stained with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) to visualize the nuclei.
Animals: Twenty healthy adult beagle dogs (7.6 ± 1.2 kg, 
male) were used. All of the dogs were judged to be in good 
health and neurologically normal. This study was approved 
by the Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources, Seoul 
National University, South Korea (SNU-100317). All dogs 
were cared for in accordance with the Animal Care and Use 
Guidelines of the Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources, 
Seoul National University, South Korea. The dogs were ran-
domly assigned to five groups based on treatment at 7 days 
after SCI: (1) the control group that received injections of 
matrigel only in the lesion site (n=4); (2) the ADSCs group 
that received adipose tissue-derived MSCs mixed with 
matrigel (n=4); (3) the BMSCs group that received BM-
derived MSCs mixed with matrigel (n=4); (4) the WJSCs 
group treated with WJ-derived MSCs mixed with matrigel 
(n=4); and (5) the UCSCs group that received UCB-derived 
MSCs mixed with matrigel (n=4). Spinal cords were har-
vested at 8 weeks after MSCs transplantation.
Preparation of matrigel: Matrigel was prepared from 
an unfractionated high-salt/urea extract of an Engelbreth-
Holm-Swarm (EHS) tumor as previously described [14, 
20] and stored at −20°C. Growth factor-depleted matrigel 
was obtained by precipitation with 20% ammonium sulfate 
as previously described [47]. Before use, the matrigel was 
thawed and maintained at 4°C until the MSCs were added.
Induction of SCI: The experimental dogs were placed 
under general anesthesia, and their spinal cords were then 
compressed by balloon compression as previously described 
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1619
[36]. Dogs were anesthetized with intravenous administra-
tion (4 mg/kg) of tramadol (Toranzin; Samsung Pharm, 
Ind. Co., Ltd., Seoul, South Korea) and 6 mg/kg propofol 
(Anepol; Ha Na Pharm Co., Ltd., Seoul, South Korea) with 
0.04 mg/kg atropine sulfate (Atropine; Je Il Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd., Seoul, South Korea) administered subcutaneously. 
Anesthesia was maintained by inhalation of 2% isoflurane 
(Aerrane; Baxter, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Datex-Ohm-
eda anesthesia monitor (Microvtec Display; GE Healthcare, 
Bradford, U.K.) was used to monitoring of physiologic 
measurements including rectal temperature, oxygen satura-
tion, end tidal CO2, electrocardiogram, minimum alveolar 
concentration, and pulse rate.
The hemilaminectomy was performed using a left para-
median approach at the fourth lumbar segment (L4). A 3.5-
mm hole was made in the left vertebral arch at the L4 level 
using a high-speed pneumatic burr. A 4-French embolectomy 
catheter (Sorin Biomedica, Saluggia, Italy) was inserted into 
the hole made at the L4 vertebral arch. The balloon was 
advanced under fluoroscopic guidance until balloon of the 
catheter reached the first lumbar segment (L1) vertebral 
body. The balloon was then inflated with a 50:50 solution 
of contrast agent (Omnipaque; Amersham Health, Cork, Ire-
land) and saline at a dose of 40 µl/kg body weight (Fig. 1A). 
After 12 hr, the balloon was deflated and removed. All dogs 
were administered analgesics at a continuous infusion rate 
for 18 hr after skin closure. Post-operative analgesics con-
tained morphine (Hwang Morphine; Ha Na Pharm) at 0.15 
mg/kg/hr, lidocaine HCl (Lidocaine Injection 0.5% Yuhan; 
Yuhan Co, Ltd., Seoul, Korea) at 2 mg/kg/hr and ketamine 
HCl (Ketamine Injection 50 Yuhan; Yuhan Co, Ltd.) at 0.3 
mg/kg/hr [36]. After the operation, the dogs were bandaged, 
monitored in an intensive care unit, and the degree of pain 
was assessed at 30 min intervals. Dogs that exhibited overt 
signs of discomfort were given IV infusions of tramadol (4 
mg/kg). Suture materials were removed after 10 days. If 
needed, manual bladder expression was performed at least 
three times daily until voluntary urination was observed. The 
general condition and neurological status of the dogs were 
evaluated twice daily during the study. No complications 
were observed except for mild cystitis and muscle atrophy of 
the hind limbs. Two dogs developed a seroma at the surgical 
site that spontaneously resolved after 2 weeks.
Transplantation of MSCs: Transplantation of matrigel 
and MSCs was performed at 1 week after SCI in each group 
of dogs. The dogs were anesthetized as same methods as 
mentioned above. Dorsal laminectomy and durotomy were 
then performed at the first lumbar vertebra. Cells (1 × 105 
cells/µl) suspended in 60 µl of matrigel were injected with 
a Hamilton syringe into dogs in each MSC group at three 
sites (cranial, epicenter, and caudal lesions; 20 µl/site) of the 
spinal cord parenchyma. This was followed by a 2 min delay 
before the needle was withdrawn (Fig. 1B). Thus, a total of 
6.0 × 106 cells were grafted into each injured spinal cord. 
Only matrigel (60 µl) was injected into the control dogs at the 
three sites in the spinal cord parenchyma. Prior to injection, 
all MSCs were labeled with NEO-STEMTM (TMSR50; red 
fluorescent nanoparticles, Biterials Co., Ltd., Seoul, South 
Korea) in order to facilitate identification of the cells within 
the histological specimens (Fig. 2A–D). Dura was closed by 
a simple continuous 8–0 vicryl suture (Fig. 1C). The lami-
Fig. 1. Induction of canine spinal cord injury and transplantation 
of MSCs. (A) A 4-French embolectomy catheter was inserted into 
the epidural space through a left hemilaminectomy hole made in 
the L4 vertebral arch. The balloons were inflated with a contrast 
agent at the L1 level. (B) MSCs were transplanted using a Ham-
ilton syringe (arrow) at three sites (cranial, epicenter and caudal; 
arrowhead) following dorsal laminectomy and durotomy at L1. (C) 
Dura was closed by a simple continuous 8-0 vicryl suture. (D) The 
laminectomy site was covered with thick layer of subcutaneous fat.
Fig. 2. Merged fluorescence and light-field images of labeled 
MSCs. MSCs were labeled with NEO-STEMTM (TMSR50, red 
fluorescent nanoparticles) before transplantation. (A) Adipose 
tissue-derived MSCs, (B) Bone marrow-derived MSCs, (C) Whar-
ton’s jelly-derived MSCs, and (D) Umbilical cord blood-derived 
MSCs.
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1620
nectomy site was covered with a thick layer of subcutaneous 
fat (Fig. 1D). The incision was closed routinely.
Histopathological and immunofluorescence assessments: 
The dogs were euthanized at 8 weeks after MSC transplanta-
tion. The spinal cords from the 12th thoracic segment to the 
third lumbar segment of all dogs were removed. The spinal 
cords were placed in 10% sucrose for 12 hr and subsequently 
immersed in a 20% sucrose solution overnight at 4°C. Dura 
was removed by scissors, embedded in optimal cutting tem-
perature compound (Tissue-Tek® O.C.T compound, Sakura 
Finetek, Torrance, CA, U.S.A.), frozen in a plastic mold on 
dry ice and sectioned in the median plane. The half of each 
block was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for ELISA 
and Western blot analyses. The other half of the block was 
cut with a cryomicrotome (Leica, Germany) into 8 µm lon-
gitudinal sections containing the epicenter of lesion. These 
sections were mounted on silane-coated glass slides. The 
slides were first stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) 
and then with Luxol fast blue and cresyl violet to identify 
myelin and nerve cells. Sizes of the demyelinated areas in 
the damaged spinal cords were calculated based on images 
of the longitudinal sections obtained with image analyzer 
software (ImageJ version 1.37; National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, U.S.A.).
Sections were incubated in goat serum for 2 hr at room 
temperature. The sections were then incubated with primary 
antibodies for 24 hr at 4°C. Primary antibodies against neu-
rofilament (NF160), neuronal nuclei (NeuN) and glial fibril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP) were used for immunofluores-
cence staining. Primary antibody binding was detected with 
anti-mouse Fluor 488 and anti-rabbit Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) 
antibodies. DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to stain the nu-
clei. Tissues were mounted with aqueous mounting medium 
(Dako Mounting Medium; Dakocytomation, Carpinteria, 
CA, U.S.A.) and kept in the dark at 4°C until analysis. Fluo-
rescence images were visualized with a confocal microscope 
(Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
Quantitative analysis of inflammatory cytokines and 
surviving nerves: Segments (1 cm) including the epicenter 
lesion from the frozen half of the spinal cord were cut and 
dry-crushed in liquid nitrogen. The tissue powder was used 
for ELISA and Western blot analysis. The half of powder 
was suspended in 0.5 ml cell extraction buffer (Denaturing 
Cell Extraction Buffer; Invitrogen) containing a protease 
inhibitor cocktail (Amresco, Solon, OH, U.S.A.). The clear 
supernatant was collected after centrifuging twice (10 min, 
13,000 g, 4°C). IL-6 and COX-2 protein levels in the tis-
sue lysates were also measured using Qunatikine ® canine 
IL-6 (R&D System, Minneapolis, MN, U.S.A.) and canine 
COX-2 ELISA (USCN Life Science Inc., Wuhan, China) 
kits according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The plates 
were measured at a wavelength of 450 nm. Each sample was 
tested in duplicate.
Half of the powder was used for Western blot analysis. 
The tissue lysate was suspended in 0.5 ml protein extraction 
buffer (PRO-PREPTM Protein Extraction Solution; iNtRON 
Biotechnology, Seongnam, South Korea) for 2 hr on ice. Ly-
sates were cleared by twice centrifugation (10 min, 13,000 
g, 4 °C), and protein concentrations were determined using 
the Bradford method (Sigma-Aldrich) [5]. Equal amounts 
of spinal cord protein (30 µg) were separated by 10% so-
dium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes. 
The membranes were washed with TBST [10 mM Tris-HCl 
(pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Tween-20], blocked with 
5% skim milk for 1 hr and incubated with the appropriate 
primary antibodies against actin (Sigma-Aldrich), Neuronal 
Class III β-Tubulin (sc-69966; Tuj1, Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy), NF-160, NeuN, GalC and GFAP at the recommended 
dilutions. The membranes were then washed and, primary 
antibody binding was detected with HRP-conjugated goat 
anti-rabbit IgG or goat anti-mouse IgG. Bands were visual-
Table 1. Comparison of the Olby score and Revised Modified Talov scale
Olby score Revised Modified Tarlov scale
No pelvic limb movement
no deep pain sensation 0
1 Flaccid hind limbswith deep pain sensation 1
but voluntary tail movement 2
Non-weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb 
with more than one joint involved
minimal movement (just one joint) 3 2 Tone in hind limb
less than 50% of the time 4
3 Purposeful hind limb motion
more than 50% of the time 5
Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb
less than 10% of the time 6
4 Stands with assistance10–50% of the time 7
more than 50% of the time 8
Weight-bearing protraction 100% of the time 
with reduced strength of pelvic limb
mistake > 90% of the time 9 5 Stands unassisted
mistake 50–90% of the time 10
6 Limited ambulation
mistake < 50% of the time 11
Ataxic pelvic limb gait with normal strength
but mistakes made > 50% of time 12 7 Full ambulation
but mistakes made < 50% of time 13 8 Climbs a 20° incline ramp half-way
Normal pelvic limb gait 14 9 Climbs 20° incline ramp
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1621
ized with enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Phar-
macia Biotech, Buckinghamshire, U.K.).
Behavioral assessment: Behavior of the dogs was as-
sessed before SCI and on a weekly basis after the operation 
to evaluate functional recovery of the hind limbs. Each dog 
was videotaped from both sides and behind during the neu-
rological examimation. Using Olby scores [51] as well as a 
revised Tarlov scale and modified Tarlov scale [34], gait was 
independently scored based on the videotapes by two indi-
viduals blinded to the experimental conditions (Table 1). The 
Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan (B.B.B) scoring system is not 
appropriate for dogs not capable of plantigrade movement. 
A mean score was calculated every week following SCI until 
the 9 weeks study period concluded.
Statistical analysis: Data are presented as the mean ± stan-
dard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were performed us-
ing SPSS (version 17.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL, U.S.A.). Differ-
ences were analyzed by Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney 
U tests. In all statistical analyses, P<0.05 was considered to 
be significant.
RESULTS
Characterization of MSCs derived from fat, BM, WJ, and 
UCB: Canine MSCs derived from fat, BM, WJ, and UCB 
showed the same morphology as human MSCs under basal 
conditions. The canine MSCs formed a monolayer consisting 
of large and flat cells that developed a spindle-shaped mor-
phology at confluence (Fig. 2). All types of MSCs showed 
the same phenotype (Fig. 3) with expression of CD44, 
CD73, CD90 and CD105, and an absence of hematopoietic 
and endothelial markers including CD14, CD34 and CD45. 
MSCs derived from fat, BM, WJ and UCB were also able 
to differentiate into adipocytes and osteoblasts (Fig. 4). The 
amount of Alizarin red S staining was greater in ADSCs and 
UCSCs groups than BMSCs and WJSCs groups.
Morphological and phenotypic changes of MSCs after 
neural induction: After growing in NIM for 72 hr, all MSCs 
exhibited morphological changes. Most cells retracted their 
cytoplasm, formed spherical cell bodies and cellular protru-
sions, and completely stopped proliferating. Finally, MSCs 
developed a neuronal appearance resulting from neural in-
duction compared to MSCs maintained under normal condi-
tions (Fig. 5). The cells underwent morphological changes as 
seen by light microscopy (Fig. 5A). We could identify four 
morphologically distinct subsets of MSCs regardless of their 
origin (Fig. 5B). About 70–80% of the MSCs appeared as 
sharp, elongated bi- or tripolar cells with primary, second-
ary and multi-branched processes (Fig. 5A and 5C). The 
appearance of the MSCs suggests that they had developed 
into neurons (black arrowhead), astrocytes (white arrow) or 
oligodendrocytes (white arrowhead) morphologically. The 
appearance of percentage of MSCs (15–25%) grown in NIM 
was similar to that of MSCs grown under basal conditions 
(Fig. 5A; white arrow) and did not show up-regulation of 
any neural marker (Fig. 5C; white arrow). There was no sig-
nificant difference in the development of neural phenotypes 
among the MSCs groups. Immunofluorescence staining 
showed that the MSCs grown in NIM had high expression 
of GFAP, GALC, NeuN and NF160 markers (Fig. 5C). The 
percentage of cells stained with GFAP in UCSCs group was 
significantly lower than that of WJSCs group. The percent-
age of cells stained with NeuN in UCSCs group was higher 
than that of ADSCs group (P<0.05).
Histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis: 
HE and Luxol fast blue staining showed that the demyelin-
ated areas in the MSCs group were significantly smaller than 
those in the control (Fig. 6A and 6B). The average lesion 
size of the WJSCs group was larger than other MSC groups, 
especially the UCSCs group (P<0.05). Generalized paren-
chymal fibrosis and demyelination were more observed at 
the injured site in the control more frequently (Fig. 6A).
In the longitudinal sections, multifocal funiculi located 
in the white matter 10 mm apart from the lesion epicenter 
were found to contain numerous dilated axonal sheaths up 
to 50 µm in diameter. These frequently contained cellular 
debris, a few gitter cells (indicating axonal degeneration), 
and a swollen, round and eosinophilic axon (Fig. 6C and 6D; 
a1–5). Degeneration and loss of motor neurons were observed 
Fig. 3. FACS analysis to assess expressions of CD14, CD34, CD44, 
CD45, CD73, CD90 and CD105 in MSCs. (A) The expression of 
cell surface markers in MSCs derived from canine bone marrow. 
(B) The percentages of the MSCs surface markers are shown as 
triple-positive, double-positive or negative in the box (+++: more 
than 95%, ++: more than 80%, −: less than 5%).
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1622
in the spinal cord gray matter 10 mm away caudally from the 
epicenter. The motor neurons were swollen, chromatolytic 
and contained karyolytic nuclei (Fig. 6C and 6D; b1–5). In 
the epicenter, scattered groups of reactive astrocytes with 
a large nucleus and finely stippled chromatin with fibrillar 
cytoplasm were found (Fig. 6C and 6D; c1–5). The lesions 
contained many plump macrophages with an abundant 
amount of amphophilic fibrillar cytoplasm that displaced the 
nucleus to the periphery of the cell. These lesions showed 
neovascularization at the periphery with macrophage aggre-
gates, and these perivascular infiltrations were composed of 
a few lymphocytes and many macrophages (Fig. 6C and 6D; 
d1–5). In the MSCs group, residual matrigel was observed 
with some astrocytosis at the margins (Fig. 6C and 6D; e1–5).
The majority of nerve cells at the epicenter of the spinal 
cord lesion in both the control and MSCs groups died at 8 
weeks after transplantation (Fig. 8A). Some surviving nerve 
cells at the lesion site were positive for NF160, NeuN and 
GFAP. The morphological features and patterns of the reac-
tive astrocytes observed with immunostaining were similar 
to those found with light microscopy and HE staining (Fig. 
6D; c1–5).
Transplanted MSCs in the injured spinal cord were 
identified by the presence of fluorescent nanoparticles in 
the cytoplasm, but these cells were not found at cranial or 
caudal injection sites of the spinal cords. Some MSCs (Fig. 
8) expressed markers for neurons (NF160), neuronal nuclei 
(NeuN) and astrocytes (GFAP). Interestingly, NF160- and 
NeuN-positive neurons were found more in the MSCs groups 
than the control animals, but GFAP-positive reactive astro-
cytes were observed more often in the control group than 
in MSCs groups (Fig. 8). The number of surviving MSCs 
in BMSCs group was less than that in other MSCs groups, 
although the same number of MSCs was transplanted into 
each group.
Surviving nerve cells and axons were found within residu-
al matrigel (Fig. 8; d), and numerous UCSCs migrated to the 
margin of the matrigel (Fig. 8; o). Active astrocytes of MSCs 
groups were more focalized than those of the control except 
for ones from the BMSCs group, while endogenous progeni-
tor cells of the control group diffusely differentiated into ac-
tive astrocytes (Fig. 8; k–o). In high magnification images, 
the axons of the control animals were found to be shorter 
and more disconnected than those of the MSCs groups at 
8 weeks after transplantation (Fig. 8; a–e). Some MSCs 
surrounded the surviving axon and differentiated neuronal 
cells having long and synaptic nerve chain (Fig. 8; b’, e’). 
But, very few MSCs expressed neurofilament marker (Fig. 
8; b–e). A few MSCs contained neural nuclei (Fig. 8; g–j).
Anti-inflammatory effects and neuronal regeneration: To 
quantitatively evaluate the anti-inflammation effects and 
neuronal regeneration in spinal cord injured site, ELISA 
was performed. The protein levels of COX-2 and IL-6 (two 
inflammatory cytokines) were significantly decreased in the 
MSCs groups compared to the control group (P<0.05, Fig. 
7). There was no difference in IL-6 protein levels among the 
MSCs groups, but the COX-2 protein level in UCSCs group 
was significantly lower than the other MSCs groups (P<0.05).
Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of Tuj1, 
NF160, NeuN, GALC and GFAP proteins were altered in 
a manner similar to what was found by histological and 
confocal microscopic analysis (Fig. 9). The expressions of 
Tuj1, NF160, NeuN and GALC were reduced in the control 
injured cords compared to spinal cords containing MSCs. 
However, the levels of GFAP protein in the injured cords of 
MSCs groups were significantly lower than those of the con-
trol group (P<0.05, Fig. 9). In UCSCs group, the expressions 
of Tuj1, NF160 and NeuN were significantly increased, and 
the level of GFAP was significantly decreased compared to 
other MSCs groups (P<0.05).
Behavioral outcomes: Prior to spinal cord occlusion, all 
experimental dogs had a score of 14 on the Olby score and 
9 on the revised modified Tarlov scale. All injured dogs 
showed complete pelvic limb paralysis after SCI (Fig. 10). 
The Olby test scores of control group gradually increased 
during the study period. However, their scores were main-
tained around 3 points which represented possible minimal 
nonweight-bearing protraction of the pelvic limb in only one 
joint throughout the 8 weeks of the study period (Fig. 10A). 
In the MSCs groups, Olby scores increased to 5–6 points 
which indicated possible weight-bearing protraction of pel-
vic limb less than 10% at 8 weeks after transplantation. The 
mobility of the MSCs groups was significantly greater than 
that of the control group after 2 weeks (P<0.05).
Functional motor outcomes were also assessed based on 
Fig. 4. Osteogenic and adipogenic differentiations of MSCs. Canine 
MSCs derived from fat (ADSCs), bone marrow (BMSCs), Whar-
ton’s jelly (WJSCs), and umbilical cord blood (UCSCs) grown in 
basal conditions had morphologies similar to human MSCs. The 
presence of mineralized bone matrix deposits was confirmed by 
Alizarin red staining, and lipid-containing vacuoles were identified 
by Oil red O staining at passage three.
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1623
the revised modified Tarlov scale (Fig. 10B). Scores for the 
MSCs groups increased to 3–4 points at 8 weeks after trans-
plantation. Neurologic recovery in MSCs groups differed 
significantly from that in control group at 2 weeks following 
MSC transplantation (P<0.05). All dogs in the MSCs groups 
had purposeful hind limb motion, and 62.5% of them (10/16) 
were able to stand with some assistance at 8 weeks after 
transplantation. No significant differences were observed 
among the MSCs groups.
DISCUSSION
All MSCs derived from the four different sources exhib-
ited typical MSC characteristics: a fibroblastoid morphol-
ogy, multipotential differentiation capability and expression 
of a characteristic set of surface proteins. MSCs derived 
from the four sources expressed classic MSC markers in-
cluding CD44, CD73, CD90 and CD105 as other studies 
described [10, 16, 35, 48]. Our study found that ADSCs, 
BMSCs, WJSCs and UCSCs all possessed a multilineage 
differentiation capacity. All MSCs differentiated into both 
osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. However, MSCs could 
not produce an intense lipid droplet, which was related to 
the short 2 weeks differentiation period. During neural 
differentiation, MSCs not only underwent nerve cell-like 
morphological changes in vitro, but also expressed neural 
cell markers. MSCs developed rounded cell bodies with bi-
polar or multipolar neurite-like extensions similar to neural 
stem cells. The neuron-like MSCs also stained positive for 
several neural proteins including GFAP, GALC, NeuN and 
NF160, which indicated that these populations consisted of 
progenitor astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons. How-
ever, morphological changes and increases in immunofluo-
resence stain for neuronal markers upon chemical induction 
of MSCs in vitro were likely the result of cellular toxicity 
and cell shrinkage [23]. So, the fate of transplanted MSCs 
Fig. 5. Morphologic changes following neuronal induction of MSCs. After growing in neural induction medium for 72 hr, all MSCs 
exhibited morphological changes. Most cells retracted their cytoplasm, forming spherical cell bodies and emitted cellular protru-
sions. (A) Neural morphology of MSCs was observed by light microscopy; (a) ADSCs, (b) BMSCs, (c) WJSCs, (d) UCSCs. Neu-
rons (black arrowhead) appeared as sharp, elongated and bipolar cells. Astrocytes (white arrow) appeared as tripolar or multipolar 
cells with primary processes. Oligodendrocytes (white arrowhead) appeared as multipolar cells with secondary and multi-branched 
processes. Undifferentiated MSCs (white arrow) appeared as spindle cells with abundant cytoplasm. (B) We identified four morpho-
logically distinct subsets of neuronal MSCs regardless of their origin. About 70–80% of the MSCs appeared as neurons, astrocytes 
or oligodendrocytes. There were no differences in the number of different neural cells types observed among the groups of MSCs. 
(C) Although, some of MSCs (white arrow) remained undifferentiated and did not up-regulate the expression of any neural markers, 
MSCs showed intense staining for GFAP, GALC, NeuN and NF160. *P<0.05 comparison between two groups.
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1624
in injured spinal cord is most important criteria to evaluate 
their potentials of neuronal differentiation.
The fate of transplanted cells is determined by the envi-
ronment into which the cells are transplanted rather than in-
trinsic properties of the cells [13, 18]. The ideal environment 
for transplanted MSCs depends on the type of SCI along 
with the time and method of transplantation. We used a clin-
ically-relevant experimental model of balloon compression 
SCI. In animal models, contusion and transection injuries are 
induced by spinal cord exposure during laminectomy, while 
balloon compression injuries occur in an enclosed environ-
ment [39]. Compression injury results in neuronal apoptosis 
at the lesion site beginning at 6 hr and persisting for at least 
3 weeks post-injury [7, 42]. Compression injury is also ac-
companied by a prolonged secondary inflammatory response 
[4] that activates resident microglia and macrophages which 
may lead to phagocytosis of myelin debris [33, 43]. In con-
trast, transection of the spinal cord results in a narrow zone 
of primary tissue damage that is followed by a focal second-
ary pathological and inflammatory responses [43].
In the present study, MSCs with matrigel were transplant-
ed into the parenchyma of the spinal cord near the lesion site 
(cranial and caudal) and directly into the injury epicenter at 
7 days post injury (dpi). This method has three main benefits. 
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1625
The first involves cavity formation at the lesion epicenter 
after SCI [24]. Matrigel maintains the microenvironment as 
a cellular bridge at the site where cavity formation is pre-
dicted to occur. This material also exerts effects that promote 
transplantation including rescuing dying cells, increasing 
cell proliferation, blocking inflammatory and cytotoxic 
cytokines, and promoting neuronal differentiation [25, 49]. 
The second benefit is that transplantation at 7 dpi may in-
crease survival rate of transplanted MSCs and dramatically 
modulate inflammation in the spinal cord. The success of 
cell transplantation is critically dependent on the time of cell 
injection [28, 31] relative to the development of neurotoxic-
ity caused by inflammatory cytokines during the acute phase 
and a cystic cavity which prevents axonal regeneration dur-
ing the chronic phase [27]. Cell survival is increased when 
the cells are transplanted during the subacute phase of SCI 
rather than the acute phase [29]. Furthermore, the lesion is 
not fully developed at 7 dpi, so transplanted MSCs may act 
as a neuroprotective agent. The third benefit, the presence of 
phagocytic cell populations at the injury site suggests that 
the epicenter may not be a favorable environment for cell 
survival [4]. Therefore, we transplanted MSCs into rela-
tively normal parenchyma (cranial and caudal) adjacent to 
the lesion site and epicenter to increase MSC survival.
This study focused on the survival and integration of allo-
genic MSCs in the injured spinal cord, and identified which 
MSCs contribute to functional recovery. Our results demon-
strated that allogenic MSCs can be successfully survived in 
injured spinal cords where they integrated into host tissue 
without immunosuppressive agents [28, 36] and MSCs also 
improved hind-limb function following SCI. Many reports 
have also described MSCs as having immunosuppres-
Fig. 6. [Left page] (A) Representative longitudinal sections of injured spinal cord from each MSCs group. Longitudinal sections 
showed fibrosis, hemorrhage and demyelinated lesions in HE and Luxol fast blue stain (the left side is rostral). Hemorrhage and 
fibrosis were identified by reddish and brownish lesions. a1–5: in the white matter, b1–5: in the gray matter, c1–5: fibrosis in the 
epicenter, d1–5: inflammatory cell infiltration into epicenter, e1-5: residual scaffolds in the epicenter. (B) MSCs transplants reduced 
the spinal cord lesion size. *P<0.05 compared to the control. #P<0.05 comparison between two groups. (C) Images of the marked 
lesions in panel (A). [This page] (D) High magnification images are shown in the white box in (C); a1–5: white matter; Most of 
the cells in the image are oligodendrocytes with dark round nuclei; some of the cells are astrocytes. White matter funiculi were 
composed of numerous dilated axonal sheaths which frequently contain cellular debris and gitter cells. Astrogliosis (arrowhead), 
gitter cells (arrow), and spheroids (asterisk). b1–5: Degenerative neurons (arrowhead) were shown in gray matter. c1–5: Fibrosis in the 
epicenter; astrogliosis (arrow) and reactive astrocytes (arrowhead). d1–5: Inflammatory infiltration in the epicenter; macrophages (ar-
rowhead) and lymphocytes (arrow). e1–5: Residual scaffolds (matrigel); some astrocytosis was found at the margins of the matrigel 
(arrowhead). The scale bar in (A) is equal to 10 mm, the scale bar in (C) is equal to 100 µm, and scale bar in (D) is equal to 25 µm, 
respectively.
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1626
sive properties, and that MSCs can modulate many T-cell 
functions [3, 9]. However, others have used the high dose 
of cyclosporine as an immunosuppressive drug, and some 
studies have found cyclosporine to be effective in improv-
ing survival of stem cell after transplantation into injured 
spinal cord [30, 45]. Therefore, MSCs transplantation with 
immnunosuppressive drugs should be considered in further 
study and clinical treatment.
We observed reduced levels of reactive astrogliosis and 
macrophage infiltration into the lesion epicenter in the MSCs 
groups. Especially, COX-2 protein expression in the UCSCs 
group was significantly decreased compared to the other 
MSCs groups. MSC transplantation modulates neuroin-
flammation by reducing the expression of proinflammatory 
cytokine such as COX-2 and IL-6 and subsequently prevents 
astrocytosis [6, 26]. Astrocytes are both the target and the 
source of neuroinflammation. These cells are stimulated 
by mediators released from microglia, down-regulate the 
expression of neurotrophic factors and release additional in-
flammatory mediators which in turn further activate microg-
lia [4]. The reduced number of GFAP-positive astrocytes 
indicated a possible deleterious effect of astrocytes, perhaps 
because these cells contributed to glial scarring. Although 
a low number of MSCs differentiated into astrocytes in the 
lesion core, these astrocytes did not appear to participate in 
a typical glial scarring reaction as indicated both by their 
morphology and reduced GFAP expression.
MSCs were transplanted into injured spinal cords to 
evaluate their potential neuroprotection and neuronal regen-
eration effects associated with SCI repair. Many MSCs can 
survive following transplantation, but very few MSCs can 
transform into neural-like cells in vivo. Most of NF160- and 
NeuN-positive neurons at injured spinal cord were derived 
from endogenous spinal cord-derived neural progenitor 
cells or preserved neurons due to neuroprotection and anti-
inflammatory effects of transplanted MSCs. Based on the 
rapid recovery after MSC transplantation observed in this 
study, cell replacement unlikely explains this improvement 
in functional outcome following SCI [54]. Many of the stud-
ies that have reported functional improvement with MSC 
transplantation do so soon after the first 2 or 3 weeks after 
injury [17, 46], suggesting that the MSCs have neuroprotec-
tive rather than a regenerative effects. Western blot analysis 
revealed that the amount of protein positive for Tuj1, NF160, 
NeuN and GALC was higher in the MSCs groups. In UCSCs 
group, the expressions of Tuj1, NF160 and NeuN were sig-
nificantly increased, and the level of GFAP was significantly 
decreased compared to other MSCs groups. Although the 
mechanism of more neuroprotection effect in UCSCs group 
is still unclear but may related with anti-inflammation fac-
tor involved in down regulation of COX-2 in injured spinal 
cord. Anti-inflammatory factors of engrafted UCSCs play 
important roles in proliferation, migration and differentiation 
of endogenous spinal cord-derived neural progenitor cells in 
an injured region.
Some of the MSCs were found close to neurons and axon, 
where MSCs can deliver trophic and immunomodulatory 
factors to neural progenitor cells and surviving neural cells. 
The ability of neural progenitor cells to secrete a variety of 
neurotrophic factors indicates that they could promote the 
growth of damaged axons [22]. The level of neurotrophic 
factors decreases after neuronal differentiation [21]. In our 
study, the majority of transplanted MSCs remained undif-
ferentiated. Before and during neural differentiation, MSCs 
can produce vascular endothelial growth factor and brain-
derived neurotrophic factor, which are known to have neuro-
protective effects in SCI lesions [15, 21].
Although UCSCs provided greater levels of neuroprotec-
tion to the surviving neural cells in the SCI lesions, func-
tional recovery was not significantly different among the 
MSCs groups. Functional recovery up to the next stage with 
our scoring system, which is possible that dogs can stand 
without assistance, is quite different from the scored in this 
study which are able to stand with assistance. We believe the 
reason for the poor correlation between neuroprotection and 
functional recovery is that increased axons and nerve cells 
Fig. 7. The expression of COX-2 and IL-6 at 8 weeks after transplantation of MSCs. COX-2 and IL-6 
protein levels in MSCs groups were lower than those in the control group. Especially, COX-2 protein 
level in UCSCs group was the lowest than that in other groups. *P<0.05 compared with control. #P<0.05 
compared between two groups.
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1627
Fig. 8. (A) Surviving MSCs in the epicenter stained for neural markers. MSCs in the injured spinal cord at 8 weeks following 
transplantation could be identified by the appearance of fluorescent nanoparticles (red) in the cytoplasm viewed by confocal 
microscopy. Some (arrowheads) MSCs expressed markers for neurons (NF160), neuronal nuclei (NeuN) and astrocytes (GFAP). 
(a–e) More shortened and disconnected axons were observed in control group than in the MSCs groups at 8 weeks. (d) and (d’) 
Surviving nerve cells and axonal growth were observed within the residual matrigel. (k–o) and (k’–o’) Morphological features 
and patterns of reactive astrocyte were similar to those observed with HE staining under light microscopy (Fig. 6D; c1–5). (o) and 
(o’) Migration of numerous UCSCs was observed at the margin of matrigel. (b’–e’) Some MSCs surrounded surviving axons but 
very few MSCs expressed neurofilament marker. (g’–j’) Some MSCs contained neural nuclei. The scale bars in (a–o) and (a’–o’) 
are equal to 100 and 25 µm, respectively.
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1628
Fig. 9. Western blot analysis of Tuj1, NF160, NeuN, GALC and GFAP expression in injured spinal 
cords. The levels of Tuj1, NF160, Neu, and GALC were increased in the injured cords compared to 
control group. The levels of GFAP protein in the MSCs groups were significantly lower than those of 
the control group (P<0.05). *P<0.05 compared with control. #P<0.05 compared between two groups.
Fig. 10. Behavioral analysis following transplantation. All injured dogs showed complete pelvic limb paralysis after SCI. Neuro-
logic recovery differed significantly among groups from 2 weeks following transplantation (P<0.05). (A) Olby scores (B) Revised 
modified Tarlov scale. There were no significant differences in functional recovery among the MSCs groups. *P<0.05 compared 
with MSCs group.
MSCS FOR TREATING SCI IN DOGS 1629
were not properly rearranged for normal nerve conduction. 
More normal neural cells in the lesion site may have been 
needed to obtain higher functional recovery rates.
In conclusion, MSCs derived from fat, BM, WJ and UCB 
promote functional recovery after SCI. UCSCs were associ-
ated with more nerve regeneration, neuroprotection and less 
inflammation than other MSCs. Additionally, matrigel with 
MSCs could act as a cellular bridge and assist axon growth 
at the injury site. Our results demonstrated that implanted 
MSCs survive and migrate toward neural cells at injured site 
and help preserve axon and neural cells, thus resulting in 
improved hind-limb function following SCI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by the 
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 20090077045), the 
Research Institute for Veterinary Science of Seoul National 
University and by a grant from the Next-Generation Bio-
Green 21 program (No.P J008030, J008032), Rural Develop-
ment Administration, Republic of Korea.
REFERENCES
 1. Akiyama, Y., Honmou, O., Kato, T., Uede, T., Hashi, K. and Koc-
sis, J. D. 2001. Transplantation of clonal neural precursor cells 
derived from adult human brain establishes functional peripheral 
myelin in the rat spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 167: 27–39. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 2. Barnett, S. C. and Riddell, J. S. 2007. Olfactory ensheathing cell 
transplantation as a strategy for spinal cord repair-what can it 
achieve? Nat. Clin. Pract. Neurol. 3: 152–161. [Medline]  [Cross-
Ref]
 3. Bartholomew, A., Sturgeon, C., Siatskas, M., Ferrer, K., McIn-
tosh, K., Patil, S., Hardy, W., Devine, S., Ucker, D., Deans, R., 
Moseley, A. and Hoffman, R. 2002. Mesenchymal stem cells 
suppress lymphocyte proliferation in vitro and prolong skin graft 
survival in vivo. Exp. Hematol. 30: 42–48. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 4. Beck, K. D., Nguyen, H. X., Galvan, M. D., Salazar, D. L., Wood-
ruff, T. M. and Anderson, A. J. 2010. Quantitative analysis of 
cellular inflammation after traumatic spinal cord injury: evidence 
for a multiphasic inflammatory response in the acute to chronic 
environment. Brain 133: 433–447. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 5. Bradford, M. M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quan-
titation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle 
of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem. 72: 248–254. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 6. Carlson, N. G., Rojas, M. A., Redd, J. W., Tang, P., Wood, B., 
Hill, K. E. and Rose, J. W. 2010. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression 
in oligodendrocytes increases sensitivity to excitotoxic death. J. 
Neuroinflammation 7: 25. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 7. Crowe, M. J., Bresnahan, J. C., Shuman, S. L., Masters, J. N. 
and Beattie, M. S. 1997. Apoptosis and delayed degeneration 
after spinal cord injury in rats and monkeys. Nat. Med. 3: 73–76. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 8. Dasari, V. R., Spomar, D. G., Gondi, C. S., Sloffer, C. A., Sav-
ing, K. L., Gujrati, M., Rao, J. S. and Dinh, D. H. 2007. Axonal 
remyelination by cord blood stem cells after spinal cord injury. J. 
Neurotrauma 24: 391–410. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 9. Di Nicola, M., Carlo-Stella, C., Magni, M., Milanesi, M., Lon-
goni, P. D., Matteucci, P., Grisanti, S. and Gianni, A. M. 2002. 
Human bone marrow stromal cells suppress T-lymphocyte pro-
liferation induced by cellular or nonspecific mitogenic stimuli. 
Blood 99: 3838–3843. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 10. Erices, A., Conget, P. and Minguell, J. J. 2000. Mesenchymal 
progenitor cells in human umbilical cord blood. Br. J. Haematol. 
109: 235–242. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 11. Fawcett, J. W. and Asher, R. A. 1999. The glial scar and central 
nervous system repair. Brain Res. Bull. 49: 377–391. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 12. Frisen, J., Johansson, C. B., Torok, C., Risling, M. and Lendahl, 
U. 1995. Rapid, widespread, and longlasting induction of nestin 
contributes to the generation of glial scar tissue after CNS injury. 
J. Cell Biol. 131: 453–464. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 13. Gorio, A., Torrente, Y., Madaschi, L., Di Stefano, A. B., Pisati, 
F., Marchesi, C., Belicchi, M., Di Giulio, A. M. and Bresolin, 
N. 2004. Fate of autologous dermal stem cells transplanted into 
the spinal cord after traumatic injury (TSCI). Neuroscience 125: 
179–189. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 14. Han, H. J., Sigurdson, W. J., Nickerson, P. A. and Taub, M. 2004. 
Both mitogen activated protein kinase and the mammalian target 
of rapamycin modulate the development of functional renal prox-
imal tubules in matrigel. J. Cell Sci. 117: 1821–1833. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 15. Hardy, S. A., Maltman, D. J. and Przyborski, S. A. 2008. Mes-
enchymal stem cells as mediators of neural differentiation. Curr. 
Stem Cell Res. Ther. 3: 43–52. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 16. Hauner, H., Entenmann, G., Wabitsch, M., Gaillard, D., Ailhaud, 
G., Negrel, R. and Pfeiffer, E. F. 1989. Promoting effect of glu-
cocorticoids on the differentiation of human adipocyte precursor 
cells cultured in a chemically defined medium. J. Clin. Invest. 84: 
1663–1670. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 17. Hofstetter, C. P., Schwarz, E. J., Hess, D., Widenfalk, J., El 
Manira, A., Prockop, D. J. and Olson, L. 2002. Marrow stromal 
cells form guiding strands in the injured spinal cord and promote 
recovery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99: 2199–2204. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 18. Johansson, C. B., Momma, S., Clarke, D. L., Risling, M., Len-
dahl, U. and Frisen, J. 1999. Identification of a neural stem cell 
in the adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell 96: 25–34. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 19. Kang, S. K., Shin, M. J., Jung, J. S., Kim, Y. G. and Kim, C. 
H. 2006. Autologous adipose tissue-derived stromal cells for 
treatment of spinal cord injury. Stem Cells Dev. 15: 583–594. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 20. Kleinman, H. K., McGarvey, M. L., Hassell, J. R., Star, V. L., 
Cannon, F. B., Laurie, G. W. and Martin, G. R. 1986. Basement 
membrane complexes with biological activity. Biochemistry 25: 
312–318. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 21. Koh, S. H., Kim, K. S., Choi, M. R., Jung, K. H., Park, K. S., 
Chai, Y. G., Roh, W., Hwang, S. J., Ko, H. J., Huh, Y. M., Kim, H. 
T. and Kim, S. H. 2008. Implantation of human umbilical cord-
derived mesenchymal stem cells as a neuroprotective therapy for 
ischemic stroke in rats. Brain Res. 1229: 233–248. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 22. Llado, J., Haenggeli, C., Maragakis, N. J., Snyder, E. Y. and 
Rothstein, J. D. 2004. Neural stem cells protect against gluta-
mate-induced excitotoxicity and promote survival of injured mo-
tor neurons through the secretion of neurotrophic factors. Mol. 
Cell. Neurosci. 27: 322–331. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 23. Lu, P., Blesch, A. and Tuszynski, M. H. 2004. Induction of bone 
marrow stromal cells to neurons: differentiation, transdifferen-
tiation, or artifact? J. Neurosci. Res. 77: 174–191. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 24. McTigue, D. M., Tani, M., Krivacic, K., Chernosky, A., Kelner, 
G. S., Maciejewski, D., Maki, R., Ransohoff, R. M. and Stokes, 
B. T. 1998. Selective chemokine mRNA accumulation in the rat 
H.-H. RYU ET AL.1630
spinal cord after contusion injury. J. Neurosci. Res. 53: 368–376. 
[Medline]
 25. Mirza, B., Krook, H., Andersson, P., Larsson, L. C., Korsgren, O. 
and Widner, H. 2004. Intracerebral cytokine profiles in adult rats 
grafted with neural tissue of different immunological disparity. 
Brain Res. Bull. 63: 105–118. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 26. Okada, S., Nakamura, M., Mikami, Y., Shimazaki, T., Mihara, M., 
Ohsugi, Y., Iwamoto, Y., Yoshizaki, K., Kishimoto, T., Toyama, 
Y. and Okano, H. 2004. Blockade of interleukin-6 receptor sup-
presses reactive astrogliosis and ameliorates functional recovery 
in experimental spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. Res. 76: 265–276. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 27. Okano, H. 2002. Stem cell biology of the central nervous system. 
J. Neurosci. Res. 69: 698–707. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 28. Park, S. S., Byeon, Y. E., Ryu, H. H., Kang, B. J., Kim, Y., Kim, 
W. H., Kang, K. S., Han, H. J. and Kweon, O. K. 2011. Compari-
son of canine umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem 
cell transplantation times: involvement of astrogliosis, inflamma-
tion, intracellular actin cytoskeleton pathways, and neurotrophin. 
Cell Transplant. 20: 1867–1880. [Medline]
 29. Parr, A. M., Kulbatski, I. and Tator, C. H. 2007. Transplantation 
of adult rat spinal cord stem/progenitor cells for spinal cord in-
jury. J. Neurotrauma 24: 835–845. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 30. Parr, A. M., Kulbatski, I., Wang, X. H., Keating, A. and Tator, 
C. H. 2008. Fate of transplanted adult neural stem/progenitor 
cells and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells in the 
injured adult rat spinal cord and impact on functional recovery. 
Surg. Neurol. 70: 600–607. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 31. Pearse, D. D. and Bunge, M. B. 2006. Designing cell- and gene-
based regeneration strategies to repair the injured spinal cord. J. 
Neurotrauma 23: 438–452. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 32. Pittenger, M. F., Mackay, A. M., Beck, S. C., Jaiswal, R. K., 
Douglas, R., Mosca, J. D., Moorman, M. A., Simonetti, D. W., 
Craig, S. and Marshak, D. R. 1999. Multilineage potential of 
adult human mesenchymal stem cells. Science 284: 143–147. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 33. Popovich, P. G., Wei, P. and Stokes, B. T. 1997. Cellular inflam-
matory response after spinal cord injury in Sprague-Dawley and 
Lewis rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 377: 443–464. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 34. Rabinowitz, R. S., Eck, J. C., Harper, C. M. Jr., Larson, D. R., 
Jimenez, M. A., Parisi, J. E., Friedman, J. A., Yaszemski, M. J. and 
Currier, B. L. 2008. Urgent surgical decompression compared to 
methylprednisolone for the treatment of acute spinal cord injury: 
a randomized prospective study in beagle dogs. Spine (Phila Pa 
1976) 33: 2260–2268. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 35. Reyes, M., Lund, T., Lenvik, T., Aguiar, D., Koodie, L. and 
Verfaillie, C. M. 2001. Purification and ex vivo expansion of 
postnatal human marrow mesodermal progenitor cells. Blood 98: 
2615–2625. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 36. Ryu, H. H., Lim, J. H., Byeon, Y. E., Park, J. R., Seo, M. S., Lee, 
Y. W., Kim, W. H., Kang, K. S. and Kweon, O. K. 2009. Func-
tional recovery and neural differentiation after transplantation of 
allogenic adipose-derived stem cells in a canine model of acute 
spinal cord injury. J. Vet. Sci. 10: 273–284. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 37. Safford, K. M., Hicok, K. C., Safford, S. D., Halvorsen, Y. D., 
Wilkison, W. O., Gimble, J. M. and Rice, H. E. 2002. Neurogenic 
differentiation of murine and human adipose-derived stromal 
cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 294: 371–379. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 38. Sasaki, M., Radtke, C., Tan, A. M., Zhao, P., Hamada, H., Houkin, 
K., Honmou, O. and Kocsis, J. D. 2009. BDNF-hypersecreting 
human mesenchymal stem cells promote functional recovery, 
axonal sprouting, and protection of corticospinal neurons after 
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 29: 14932–14941. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 39. Scheff, S. W., Rabchevsky, A. G., Fugaccia, I., Main, J. A. and 
Lumpp, J. E. Jr. 2003. Experimental modeling of spinal cord 
injury: characterization of a force-defined injury device. J. Neu-
rotrauma 20: 179–193. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 40. Seo, M. S., Jeong, Y. H., Park, J. R., Park, S. B., Rho, K. H., Kim, 
H. S., Yu, K. R., Lee, S. H., Jung, J. W., Lee, Y. S. and Kang, K. 
S. 2009. Isolation and characterization of canine umbilical cord 
blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells. J. Vet. Sci. 10: 181–187. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 41. Shetty, P., Cooper, K. and Viswanathan, C. 2010. Comparison of 
proliferative and multilineage differentiation potentials of cord 
matrix, cord blood, and bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. 
Asian J. Transfus. Sci. 4: 14–24. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 42. Shuman, S. L., Bresnahan, J. C. and Beattie, M. S. 1997. Apopto-
sis of microglia and oligodendrocytes after spinal cord contusion 
in rats. J. Neurosci. Res. 50: 798–808. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 43. Siegenthaler, M. M., Tu, M. K. and Keirstead, H. S. 2007. The 
extent of myelin pathology differs following contusion and 
transection spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 24: 1631–1646. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 44. Silver, J. and Miller, J. H. 2004. Regeneration beyond the glial 
scar. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5: 146–156. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 45. Swanger, S. A., Neuhuber, B., Himes, B. T., Bakshi, A. and 
Fischer, I. 2005. Analysis of allogeneic and syngeneic bone mar-
row stromal cell graft survival in the spinal cord. Cell Transplant. 
14: 775–786. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 46. Sykova, E. and Jendelova, P. 2005. Magnetic resonance track-
ing of implanted adult and embryonic stem cells in injured brain 
and spinal cord. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1049: 146–160. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 47. Taub, M., Wang, Y., Szczesny, T. M. and Kleinman, H. K. 1990. 
Epidermal growth factor or transforming growth factor alpha is 
required for kidney tubulogenesis in matrigel cultures in serum-
free medium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87: 4002–4006. [Med-
line]  [CrossRef]
 48. Troyer, D. L. and Weiss, M. L. 2008. Wharton’s jelly-derived 
cells are a primitive stromal cell population. Stem Cells 26: 
591–599. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 49. Uemura, M., Refaat, M. M., Shinoyama, M., Hayashi, H., Hashi-
moto, N. and Takahashi, J. 2010. Matrigel supports survival and 
neuronal differentiation of grafted embryonic stem cell-derived 
neural precursor cells. J. Neurosci. Res. 88: 542–551. [Medline]
 50. Wagner, W., Wein, F., Seckinger, A., Frankhauser, M., Wirkner, 
U., Krause, U., Blake, J., Schwager, C., Eckstein, V., Ansorge, 
W. and Ho, A. D. 2005. Comparative characteristics of mesen-
chymal stem cells from human bone marrow, adipose tissue, and 
umbilical cord blood. Exp. Hematol. 33: 1402–1416. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 51. Webb, A. A., Jeffery, N. D., Olby, N. J. and Muir, G. D. 2004. 
Behavioural analysis of the efficacy of treatments for injuries to 
the spinal cord in animals. Vet. Rec. 155: 225–230. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
 52. Yang, C. C., Shih, Y. H., Ko, M. H., Hsu, S. Y., Cheng, H. and 
Fu, Y. S. 2008. Transplantation of human umbilical mesenchymal 
stem cells from Wharton’s jelly after complete transection of the 
rat spinal cord. PLoS ONE 3: e3336. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
 53. Zai, L. J. and Wrathall, J. R. 2005. Cell proliferation and replace-
ment following contusive spinal cord injury. Glia 50: 247–257. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
 54. Zhang, H. T., Cheng, H. Y., Cai, Y. Q., Ma, X., Liu, W. P., Yan, Z. 
J., Jiang, X. D. and Xu, R. X. 2009. Comparison of adult neuro-
spheres derived from different origins for treatment of rat spinal 
cord injury. Neurosci. Lett. 458: 116–121. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
