NEUROSYSTEMS
Chondroitinase ABC promotes compensatory sprouting of
the intact corticospinal tract and recovery of forelimb
function following unilateral pyramidotomy in adult mice
Michelle L. Starkey,* Katalin Bartus, Andrew W. Barritt and Elizabeth J. Bradbury
Regeneration Group, King’s College London, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Hodgkin Building, Guy’s Campus,
London Bridge, London, SE1 IUL, UK
Keywords: chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans, extracellular matrix, forelimb asymmetry, glial scar, plasticity
Abstract
Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans (CSPGs) are extracellular matrix molecules whose inhibitory activity is attenuated by the
enzyme chondroitinase ABC (ChABC). Here we assess whether CSPG degradation can promote compensatory sprouting of the
intact corticospinal tract (CST) following unilateral injury and restore function to the denervated forelimb. Adult C57BL/6 mice
underwent unilateral pyramidotomy and treatment with either ChABC or a vehicle control. Significant impairments in forepaw sym-
metry were observed following pyramidotomy, with injured mice preferentially using their intact paw during spontaneous vertical
exploration of a cylinder. No recovery on this task was observed in vehicle-treated mice. However, ChABC-treated mice showed
a marked recovery of function, with forelimb symmetry fully restored by 5 weeks post-injury. Functional recovery was associated
with robust sprouting of the uninjured CST, with numerous axons observed crossing the midline in the brainstem and spinal cord
and terminating in denervated grey matter. CST fibres in the denervated side of the spinal cord following ChABC treatment were
closely associated with the synaptic marker vGlut1. Immunohistochemical assessment of chondroitin-4-sulphate revealed that
CSPGs were heavily digested around lamina X, alongside midline crossing axons and in grey matter regions where sprouting
axons and reduced peri-neuronal net staining was observed. Thus, we demonstrate that CSPG degradation promotes midline
crossing and reinnervation of denervated target regions by intact CST axons and leads to restored function in the denervated
forepaw. Enhancing compensatory sprouting using ChABC provides a route to restore function that could be applied to disorders
such as spinal cord injury and stroke.
Introduction
Functional recovery and axonal regeneration following injury to the
adult CNS is restricted by both intrinsic (Neumann & Woolf, 1999;
Plunet et al., 2002; Goldberg et al., 2004) and extrinsic (Silver &
Miller, 2004; Fawcett, 2006; Cafferty et al., 2008; Schwab, 2010) fac-
tors. Therefore, methods that enhance the ability of spared CNS axons
to sprout into areas denervated by an injury provide a potential route
for promoting functional improvements (Thallmair et al., 1998;
Bareyre & Schwab, 2003; Bradbury & McMahon, 2006; Cafferty &
Strittmatter, 2006; Brus-Ramer et al., 2007; Maier et al., 2008).
A number of factors have been identified that restrict CNS plasticity
in the adult. For example, chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans
(CSPGs) are inhibitory extracellular matrix molecules that play a role
in synaptic stabilization and in limiting neuronal plasticity (Hockfield
et al., 1990; Yamaguchi, 2000; Corvetti & Rossi, 2005). The
inhibitory nature of CSPGs can be attenuated by the enzyme chondro-
itinase ABC (ChABC), which degrades inhibitory glycosaminoglycan
(GAG) side-chains from the CSPG core protein, rendering them less
inhibitory to growth and reorganisation. There are now numerous
examples in the literature demonstrating enhanced growth and regen-
eration of injured axons following in vivo delivery of ChABC, with
many of these studies also demonstrating improvements in functional
recovery (Bradbury et al., 2002; Yick et al., 2004; Caggiano et al.,
2005; Fouad et al., 2005; Houle et al., 2006; Tester & Howland,
2008; Tom et al., 2009a; Karimi-Abdolrezaee et al., 2010; reviewed
in Bradbury & Carter, 2011). Recovery observed after injury and
ChABC treatment, however, is unlikely to be solely due to regenera-
tion of injured axons. Other mechanisms, such as the plasticity of
intact systems, are likely to contribute to the striking effects on func-
tion achieved following CSPG digestion (reviewed in Kwok et al.,
2008; Bartus et al., 2011). Indeed, plasticity following CSPG modifi-
cation has previously been demonstrated in a number of CNS systems.
For example, disruption of CSPG-enriched peri-neuronal nets (PNNs)
with ChABC injections can reactivate experience-dependent plasticity
within the adult visual cortex following monocular deprivation
(Pizzorusso et al., 2002). ChABC injections can also promote tran-
sient sprouting of intact Purkinje axons in the cerebellum (Corvetti &
Correspondence: Dr E. J. Bradbury, as above.
E-mail: elizabeth.bradbury@kcl.ac.uk
*Present address: Balgrist University Hospital, University of Zurich, Forchstrasse 340,
8008, Zurich, Switzerland
Received 31 October 2011, revised 26 August 2012, accepted 12 September 2012
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 36, pp. 3665–3678, 2012 doi:10.1111/ejn.12017
European Journal of Neuroscience
Rossi, 2005) and sprouting of spared retinal axons in the denervated
superior colliculus when combined with brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (Tropea et al., 2003). Moreover, functional collateral sprouting
of forelimb sensory afferents within partially denervated brainstem
nuclei has been demonstrated following spinal cord injury and
ChABC treatment, with evidence of terminal field expansion in areas
of CSPG degradation (Massey et al., 2006). Compensatory sprouting
of sensory projections has also been demonstrated within the spinal
cord following a spared root injury, with a single injection of ChABC
into the spinal cord leading to primary afferent terminal field expan-
sion and recovery of function in the denervated forelimb (Cafferty
et al., 2008). Thus, plasticity within the brain and in sensory projec-
tions to the brainstem and spinal cord following ChABC treatment has
been convincingly demonstrated. However, whether CSPG degrada-
tion can affect plasticity of descending spinal projections important
for motor function has not yet been determined. Aberrant sprouting of
the lesioned corticospinal tract (CST), a major descending motor path-
way, has been observed rostral to a spinal cord injury following
ChABC treatment and dorsal column crush injury (Barritt et al.,
2006) or spinal contusion (Karimi-Abdolrezaee et al., 2010). These
studies also demonstrated increased sprouting of descending seroto-
nergic projections caudal to the spinal injury following ChABC treat-
ment (Barritt et al., 2006; Karimi-Abdolrezaee et al., 2010).
Similarly, serotonergic fibre sprouting has been demonstrated in hemi-
sected cats following ChABC treatment, and this plasticity was
accompanied by functional recovery (Tester & Howland, 2008).
Recent evidence has also shown that intraspinal ChABC promotes
serotonergic fibre sprouting and is able to restore activity to the paraly-
sed diaphragm following cervical hemisection, an effect that is aug-
mented when combined with a regeneration-promoting peripheral
nerve graft (Alilain et al., 2011).
Thus, plasticity of CST and/or serotonergic projections may con-
tribute to the functional recovery observed following ChABC treat-
ment. However, determining sprouting vs. regenerative growth in
injury models involving partial transection of the spinal cord is diffi-
cult as various spared spinal projections, as well as minor components
of injured projections, could contribute to the observed effects. Here
we determine whether ChABC treatment can promote functionally
useful compensatory sprouting of an intact descending motor projec-
tion, using a unilateral pyramidotomy model in the adult mouse (Star-
key et al., 2005). This injury model specifically allows the assessment
of anatomical reorganisation of the intact CST, and has previously
been used to demonstrate compensatory sprouting and functional
recovery following neutralisation of myelin inhibitors (Thallmair
et al., 1998; Z’Graggen et al., 1998; Cafferty & Strittmatter, 2006;
Lee et al., 2010) and following enhanced activity in the intact tract
(Brus-Ramer et al., 2007; Maier et al., 2008; Carmel et al., 2010;
Starkey et al., 2011). Using this model we demonstrate that ChABC
treatment enables robust sprouting of intact CST fibres across the mid-
line to innervate denervated grey matter territory in the brainstem and
spinal cord. Importantly, plasticity of the intact CST was associated
with recovery of forepaw symmetry. These data provide novel
evidence that modifying CSPGs post-injury can lead to compensatory
reorganisation of a major descending motor pathway and can restore
function to the denervated forelimb.
Materials and methods
Animals and surgery
The study was performed in accordance with protocols approved by
King’s College London. All surgical procedures were performed in
accordance with UK Home Office regulations [European
Communities Council Directive of 24 November 1986 (86/609/
EEC)] and sterile precautions were used throughout. Thirty-one adult
male C57BL/6 mice (Harlan, UK; 20–25 g) were used. Mice were
singly housed in cages containing nesting material (sawdust and
paper), but no other environmental enrichment. There were three
experimental groups in the study: sham (uninjured); pyramidotomy
plus vehicle; pyramidotomy plus ChABC. Initial numbers were
n = 12 for each of the lesioned groups, plus n = 7 sham controls.
However, two mice were excluded at the end of the study, following
histological analysis, due to incomplete pyramidotomy (one from
each of the treated groups); therefore, final numbers were n = 11 for
each of the lesioned groups, plus n = 7 sham controls. These mice
were either culled at 11 days post-injury for histological assessment
of CSPG degradation (n = 4 per lesioned group, n = 2 sham con-
trols), or underwent functional testing for 6 weeks post-injury (n = 7
per lesioned group, n = 5 sham controls) followed by anatomical
tracing of the CST and histological assessments at 9 weeks post
injury (n = 5 per group for quantification of midline sprouting plus
an additional n = 2 per group for the two lesioned groups to assess
midline sprouting in horizontal sections).
Insertion of intracerebroventricular (I.C.V.) cannula
Mice were anaesthetised with a mixture of medetomidine (0.5 mg/
kg; Parke-Davis, Gwent, UK) and ketamine (75 mg/kg; Parke-
Davis, Gwent, UK) injected intraperitoneally (i.p.). I.C.V. cannula-
tion was as previously described (Carter et al., 2008). Briefly,
anaesthetised animals were placed into a stereotaxic frame, the skull
was exposed and a small hole made with a 25-gauge needle at the
following coordinates: 0.5 from bregma, 1 mm lateral to the mid-
line. An I.C.V. cannula, composed of a 30-gauge needle with a 90°
bend 2.5 mm from the tip connected to 40 mm of flexible silastic
tubing (VWR, UK), was inserted into the hole and secured into
place using cyanoacrylate gel (RS Components, UK). The skin was
then sutured with 4-0 Vicryl (Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson Intl) over
the cannula leaving only the tubing exposed. Animals were placed
under a heated lamp to recover. An hour after the time of anaesthe-
sia administration, animals were given atipamezole (1 mg/kg; Parke-
Davis) subcutaneously to reverse anaesthesia, and were allowed to
recover fully before being returned to their home cage.
Unilateral pyramidotomy surgery
Two days after cannula surgery, mice were anaesthetised with a
mixture of medetomidine and ketamine as described above and
received a unilateral pyramidotomy lesion, whereby the CST was
completely transected on one side at the level of the medulla, as
described previously (Starkey et al., 2005). Briefly, a ventral mid-
line incision was made, the sterno-hyoid and -thyroid muscles were
lightly retracted, and the trachea and oesophagus slightly displaced.
Blunt deep dissection was performed to reveal the surface of the
occipital bone, and the ventrocaudal part was partially removed to
expose the medullary pyramid. The dura was opened and the pyra-
midal tract incised on the right-hand side with iridectomy scissors
(FST, cutting width of 0.5 mm, depth of 0.25 mm). The oesopha-
gus, trachea and muscles were repositioned, and the skin sutured.
Control animals were anaesthetised as above but underwent sham
surgery, in which the occipital bone was exposed and then the
wound closed. An hour after the time of anaesthesia administration
mice were given atipamezole, as before, and were allowed to
recover before being returned to their home cage, which was placed
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3666 M. L. Starkey et al.
on a heated blanket for 24 h. Weight was recorded once a week fol-
lowing surgery. No differences in body weight loss or recovery were
observed between the two lesioned groups: in both cases some body
weight loss occurred immediately after lesion surgery, but this was
never > 5%, followed by a weekly weight gain throughout the
remainder of the study.
Delivery of ChABC
Immediately after the unilateral pyramidotomy lesion, mice received
either 6 lL high-purity, protease-free ChABC (Seikagaku; 10 U/mL
in sterile saline) followed by a 3-lL saline flush, delivered as a
bolus injection via the externalised I.C.V. cannula tubing, which
was sealed after injection with cyanoacrylate gel. Control-treated rats
were treated with vehicle (9 lL of saline; Normasol, Sterets, con-
taining 0.9% w/v NaCl; Medlock Medical). Saline was used as the
control treatment in line with previous studies (Bradbury et al.,
2002; Barritt et al., 2006; Houle et al., 2006; Cafferty et al., 2008;
Tom et al., 2009b; Alilain et al., 2011) and because previous work
has shown that treatment with saline or a control enzyme such as
penicillinase produces comparable outcomes (Bradbury et al., 2002).
Further injections were performed on days 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 follow-
ing pyramidotomy, whereby mice were anaesthetised with 5% iso-
fluorane (Abbott Laboratories) in oxygen, and received either
ChABC or vehicle injections, as described above. Following each
treatment, mice were allowed to recover from anaesthesia in their
home cage before being returned to their holding room.
Behavioural testing
Behavioural testing was carried out by an experimenter blinded to the
treatment group. Mice were placed in the cylinder twice prior to sur-
gery for habituation and to obtain baseline scores, and were then
tested on days 2, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35 and 42 post-surgery. On day 2,
when behavioural testing coincided with drug delivery, behavioural
testing was completed prior to drug treatment. The forelimb asymme-
try test examines forelimb use during spontaneous vertical exploration
of a cylinder and is sensitive to limb use asymmetries (Liu et al.,
1999; Schallert et al., 2000; Starkey et al., 2005). The method for
testing and scoring of forelimb asymmetry in mice was as previously
described (Starkey et al., 2005). Briefly, mice were placed in a clear
Perspex cylinder (300 mm in height, 80 mm in diameter) for 5 min.
A mirror was placed at an angle behind the cylinder so that the fore-
paws could be viewed at all times. The testing session was videotaped
(Sony digital video camera recorder, DCR-TRV60E), and an experi-
menter blinded to the treatment group scored forepaw use at a later
date. The paw used for weight support during a rear was scored as
described before (Starkey et al., 2005). This produced a percentage
score for the use of the left paw, the right paw and both paws for each
animal. To give a total percentage score for the use of each paw, the
percentage score for both paws was halved. This halved ‘both’ score
was then added to the total percentage score for the left paw and to the
total percentage score for the right to give a ‘true’ score for the total
use of the left and right paws, respectively.
Anterograde tracing of the intact CST
Following the completion of behavioural testing (6 weeks post-
injury), mice were deeply anaesthetised with medetomidine and
ketamine (as described above), positioned in a stereotaxic frame and
the skull exposed. The intact CST projection was labelled using the
anterograde tracer biotinylated dextran amine [BDA; 10 000 MW,
Molecular Probes; 10% in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)],
injected into six sites over the right (intact) primary sensorimotor
cortex. All sites were 1.5 mm ventral to the surface of the skull.
The injection coordinates of anterior–posterior (AP) and lateral (L)
from bregma (in mm) were as follows: site 1, AP = 0.0, L = +1.0;
site 2, AP = +1.0, L = +1.0; site 3, AP = +2.0, L = +1.0; site 4,
AP = +1.5, L = +1.5; site 5, AP = +2.0, L = +2.0; and site 6,
AP = +1.0, L = +2.0. A 30-gauge stainless-steel injection cannula
connected to a microsyringe by polyethylene tubing (Scientific Lab-
oratory Supplies, UK) was filled with BDA (0.5 lL/site). Injections
were made at a rate of 0.25 lL/min using a microinfusion pump.
After infusion, the injection cannula was left in place for a further
1 min before being carefully withdrawn. An hour after the time of
anaesthesia administration, animals were given atipamezole, as
above, and were allowed to recover before being returned to their
home cage.
Tissue processing
Mice were culled at 11 days post-injury for assessment of CSPG
digestion, or 9 weeks post-injury (i.e. 3 weeks after BDA tracing)
for assessment of CST sprouting. All mice were deeply anaesthe-
tised with pentobarbitone (80 mg/kg, intraperitoneally; Merial Ani-
mal Health, Essex, UK) and transcardially perfused with 10 mL
saline followed by 50 mL paraformaldehyde (PFA; 4% in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer). Blocks of tissue containing the lesion site in the
brainstem and the cervical spinal cord were dissected, post-fixed in
4% PFA (2 h at 4 °C) and stored in PBS + 0.1% NaN3 (Sigma-
Aldrich) solution overnight at 4 °C. The following day they were
blocked in 10% gelatine (Sigma-Aldrich), the gelatine blocks were
fixed in 4% PFA for 4 h at 4 °C, then transferred to a solution of
PBS + 0.1% NaN3 and stored at 4 °C until sectioning. Transverse
sections [for protein kinase C (PKC)-c, BDA, chondroitin-4-sulphate
(C-4-S) and Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA)] and horizontal
sections (for BDA and vGlut1) were cut on a vibratome at 30 lm,
and the sections stored in PBS + 0.1% NaN3 at 4 °C until immuno-
fluorescence staining. All stained sections were visualised using a
Carl Zeiss Axioplan 2 Imaging fluorescence microscope with the
Carl Zeiss AxioVision LE 4.3 software programme (Carl Zeiss).
Immunohistochemistry
Assessment of lesion
Sections through the brainstem and spinal cord were immunostained
with an antibody against the PKC-c, as previously described (Brad-
bury et al., 2002; Starkey et al., 2005, 2011; Barritt et al., 2006), to
visualise the CST and to determine whether unilateral pyramidotomy
accurately transected one side of the CST, leaving the other
side intact. All antibodies were diluted in PBS + 0.2% Triton
X-100 + 0.1% NaN3, unless otherwise stated. Free-floating sections
were incubated with rabbit anti-PKC-c (1 : 200; Santa Cruz Bio-
technology) overnight, followed by donkey anti-rabbit tetramethyl-
rhodamine-5-(and 6)-isothiocyanate (TRITC; 1 : 200, Jackson) for
4 h. Sections were then mounted on Superfrost plus microscope
slides (BDH Laboratory Supplies, UK) and coverslipped in Vecta-
shield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories).
Visualisation of BDA tracing
BDA-labelled CST fibres were visualised in transverse sections
through the brainstem and cervical spinal cord (n = 5 per group)
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3667
using tyramide signal amplification, as previously described (Barritt
et al., 2006). Briefly, sections were incubated in the following
reagents: avidin-biotin-complex (ABC) solution (1 : 5, in PBS; Vec-
tor Laboratories) for 30 min; biotinyl tyramide (1 : 75 in amplifica-
tion diluent; PerkinElmer Life Sciences) for 10 min; extra-avidin
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; 1 : 500; Sigma) for 2 h. Sections
were then mounted onto slides and coverslipped as above. Visualisa-
tion of BDA labelling was also performed in horizontal sections
from the lesioned and treated groups (n = 2 animals from each) for
qualitative assessments of BDA labelling in the horizontal plane and
for visualising vGlut1-BDA-labelled axon varicosities in sprouting
CST fibres after treatment. Double-labelling was performed using
tyramide signal amplification for BDA (as above) followed by
immunohistochemistry for the synaptic marker vGlut1 by incubation
in the following: rabbit anti-vGlut1 (1 : 500; Synaptic Systems)
overnight; and then donkey anti-rabbit Alexa 546 (1 : 1000; Invitro-
gen) for 4 h. Sections were then mounted onto slides and covers-
lipped as above.
Quantification of BDA-labelled CST midline crossing
Sprouting of BDA-labelled intact CST axons across the midline into
denervated areas was quantified in transverse sections from the
brainstem (at the level of the pyramidal decussation; n = 3 sections
per animal) and cervical spinal cord (levels C5–C7, which innervate
the forelimb; n = 6 sections per animal, n = 2 each from C5, C6,
C7) from n = 5 mice per treatment group. All sections were photo-
graphed under the same exposure and montages were made. For
each section montage the mean pixel intensity inside a box
(350 9 150 lm) was measured at five separate regions in the grey
matter of the denervated (not BDA traced) side using NIH ImageJ
(version 1.38; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA)
by an experimenter blinded to the treatment group. The intensity of
each of these boxes was recorded, and the mean of the five boxes
was calculated for each section. A background reading was then
taken for each section in a region of the grey matter that did not
contain any BDA-labelled fibres, and this background value was
subtracted from the mean pixel intensity for the denervated side of
the spinal cord for each section to give a ‘corrected mean pixel
intensity’. To adjust for differences in BDA labelling efficiency
between animals, a ‘tracing efficiency’ reading was taken in the
traced portion of the tract in the dorsal columns and averaged over
all sections from one animal. The previously calculated corrected
mean pixel intensity was then divided by this tracing efficiency
value for each animal to give the normalised value for sprouting.
Normalised values were averaged across sections to give a mean
value for each animal (for both the brainstem region and the cervical
spinal cord) from which group means were then calculated. The data
reported are the normalised value of sprouting for the denervated
side as a percentage of the fibre labelling on the innervated side.
The same measurements were also carried out for the innervated
(BDA traced) side to determine whether there were any differences
in CST innervation within the intact side following treatment.
Assessment of CSPG digestion
To assess the extent of CSPG digestion, sections of brainstem and
spinal cord were immunostained with anti-C-4-S antibody,
which binds the stub region remaining following ChABC digestion of
4-sulphated CSPGs, using tyramide signal amplification as previously
described (Barritt et al., 2006; Carter et al., 2008). Free-floating tissue
sections were incubated in the following: hydrogen peroxide (0.3%)
for 20 min; mouse monoclonal anti-C-4-S (1 : 5000; ICN) overnight;
biotinylated horse anti-mouse secondary antibody (1 : 400; Jackson
ImmunoResearch) for 90 min; ABC solution (1 : 5 in PBS; VectorL-
abs) for 30 min; biotinyl tyramide (1 : 75 in amplification diluent;
PerkinElmer Life Sciences) for 10 min; and Extra-avidin FITC
(1 : 500; Sigma) for 2 h. Sections were then mounted onto slides and
coverslipped (as above). For quantification of CSPG digestion in
lesioned and treated mice, sections (n = 3 per animal, one from each
of the levels C5, C6 and C7, where CST sprouting was quantified)
were photographed under the same exposure and montages were
made. For each section, montage intensity measurements were
obtained in three boxes placed in the spinal grey matter (Fig. 5A and
B), using NIH imageJ software, as above, and a background reading
(taken from a region that did not contain any C-4-S-positive immu-
nolabelling) was subtracted to give corrected mean intensities per ani-
mal. Mean intensities were then derived for each treatment group. To
evaluate degradation of PNN CSPGs, spinal cord sections were pro-
cessed for WFA histochemistry by incubation in the following:
TRITC-conjugated WFA (1 : 200; Patricell) overnight. Sections were
then mounted and coverslipped as above.
Statistics
All statistical tests were carried out with the Sigma Stat 3.0.1 (SPSS)
statistical package. Left and right forepaw symmetry in the rearing
task (% left and% right paw use) was compared using a two-way
repeated-measures (RM) analysis of variance (ANOVA); C-4-S intensi-
ties within three regions were compared between groups using a
two-way ANOVA; and CST sprouting was compared between groups
in two regions (CST decussation and cervical spinal cord) using a
one-way ANOVA. All post hoc comparisons were made using the Stu-
dent–Newman–Keuls test. Correlations of behavioural function and
anatomical sprouting were performed on individual animals by plot-
ting percentage left paw use against percentage sprouting in the left
spinal cord for lesioned animals treated with ChABC (n = 5 of the
animals that underwent behavioural testing and also had BDA trac-
ing), and correlation coefficients were calculated using Pearson’s
correlation test. Significance for all tests was set at P < 0.05, and
data are presented as mean ± standard error except where otherwise
stated.
Results
Histological assessment of lesion
To examine plasticity of intact CST projections after injury to the
contralateral CST, we performed a unilateral pyramidotomy to fully
transect the right pyramidal tract in the medulla oblongata, leaving
the left pyramidal tract intact. The extent of the pyramidotomy
lesion was determined using immunostaining for PKCc (Fig. 1). In
sham (uninjured) control mice, positive PKCc immunofluorescent
staining of the CST was present bilaterally in the pyramidal tracts
(Fig. 1A), at the level of the pyramidal tract decussation (Fig. 1C),
and within the dorsal funiculi in the cervical spinal cord (Fig. 1E).
Following unilateral pyramidotomy, positive PKCc immunofluores-
cent staining was only present unilaterally in the left pyramidal tract
(Fig. 1B), and in the left tract crossing over to the right to project
dorsally at the level of the pyramidal tract decussation (Fig. 1D).
Below the level of the decussation, a lesion of the right pyramidal
tract will denervate the CST on the left side of the spinal cord;
therefore, in the cervical spinal cord positive PKCc immunofluores-
cent staining was present unilaterally in the right dorsal funiculus
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3668 M. L. Starkey et al.
(Fig. 1F). Two lesioned mice (n = 1 from each of the treatment
groups) did not have a complete lesion (i.e. the pyramidal tract was
partially intact on the denervated side) and were therefore excluded
from the study. All other mice were successfully lesioned, with a
complete unilateral transection of the right pyramidal tract.
Ch ABC promotes recovery of forelimb symmetry following
unilateral pyramidotomy
During pre-surgery baseline testing, mice in all groups used their left
and right forepaws equally for weight support (note that a score of
50% indicates symmetrical limb usage; higher than 50% indicates a
preference for that particular paw; and below 50% indicates less pref-
erence for that paw) during a rear (sham: 48.6 ± 3.4% left vs.
51.4 ± 3.4% right; Fig. 2A; pyramidotomy and vehicle: 49.8 ± 0.7%
left vs. 50.2 ± 0.7% right; Fig. 2B; pyramidotomy and ChABC:
51.7 ± 1.6% left vs. 48.3 ± 1.6% right; Fig. 2C). Throughout the test-
ing period, sham mice continued to use both paws equally, with no
significant differences observed between paw usage throughout (two-
way RM ANOVA, F2,28 = 0.007, P = 0.94; Fig. 2A). Unilateral pyra-
midotomy produced a striking effect on forepaw symmetry, with a
marked preference for using the right forepaw (intact CST) and
decreased use of the left forepaw (injured CST) following injury (e.g.
at 2 days post-lesion scores were 28.0% left vs. 72.0% right following
pyramidotomy and vehicle treatment; and 26.1% left vs. 73.9% right
following pyramidotomy and ChABC treatment; Fig. 2B and C,
respectively). In vehicle-treated mice, this lesion-induced asymmetry
did not recover; mice consistently used the right forepaw significantly
more often than the left for weight support throughout the entire test-
ing period (two-way RM ANOVA, F2,42 = 20.2, P = 0.004; post hoc
analyses revealed significant differences in the use of the left forepaw
compared with right at every post-lesion time point, P < 0.025, Stu-
dent–Newman–Keuls; Fig. 2B). In contrast, mice that were treated
with ChABC following pyramidotomy showed a gradual recovery of
forepaw symmetry, with increased use of the impaired forepaw occur-
ring over time following injury (by 21 days post-injury scores were
41.9 ± 9% left vs. 58.1 ± 9% right), and forepaw symmetry fully
recovered by 5 weeks post-injury (at 35 days post-injury scores were
51.8 ± 3.7% left vs. 48.2 ± 3.7% right; Fig. 2C), with a significant
difference observed in the use of the two forepaws in the first 2 weeks
following injury but no significant differences thereafter (two-way
RM ANOVA, F2,42 = 5.2, P < 0.001; post hoc analyses revealed signifi-
cant differences in left vs. right forepaw use at 2, 7 and 14 days post-
injury, P < 0.05, but no significant differences between forepaw use
from 3 weeks post-injury until the end of the 6-week testing period,
P > 0.1, Student–Newman–Keuls; Fig. 2C). No significant differ-
ences were observed in the forepaw used to push off with or the fore-
paw used to land on for any of the time points post-surgery (data not
shown), which is in agreement with our previous observations (Star-
key et al., 2005). Thus, we have shown that following unilateral pyra-
midotomy, mice have a significantly reduced tendency to use their left
(lesioned CST) forepaw for weight support; this effect was robust and
lasted for the entire testing period. Mice receiving ChABC treatment
show a full recovery of this deficit.
Ch ABC promotes sprouting of the intact CST following
unilateral pyramidotomy
Immunofluorescent visualization of BDA, injected into the cortex to
label the intact CST, was used to assess axonal sprouting into
A B
C D
E F
Fig. 1. Unilateral pyramidotomy transects the CST on one side, leaving the other side intact. PKCc immunohistochemistry to identify the CST in transverse
sections through the brainstem and spinal cord reveals bilateral staining of the CST (arrows) in an uninjured (sham) animal, apparent in the pyramidal tracts
(A), the pyramidal tract decussation (C) and in the dorsal columns of the cervical spinal cord (E). Following unilateral pyramidotomy, positive PKCc immuno-
reactivity (arrows) was only present in the intact CST, in the left pyramidal tract (B), at the decussation from left pyramidal tract to right dorsal spinal cord (D),
and in the intact CST projecting in the right side of the dorsal columns in the cervical spinal cord (F). Scale bars: 500 lm.
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3669
denervated regions of the brainstem and spinal cord. In all mice
BDA-labelled axons were evident in the pyramidal tract ipsilateral
to the injection (left side), and no labelled axons were seen in the
contralateral (right) pyramidal tract (data not shown). In sham (unin-
jured) mice, at the level of the pyramidal decussation, most CST
axons decussated and projected dorsally to the opposite side (to
form the main CST projection in the dorsal columns), with a small
contingent of lateral projecting terminals collecting in bundles in the
dorsomedial and dorsolateral grey matter (Fig. 3A); very few BDA-
labelled axons were apparent in the grey matter of the unlabelled
(left) side at the level of pyramidal decussation (Fig. 3A). In the cer-
vical spinal cord of sham mice, BDA-labelled CST axons were
apparent in the right dorsal column with profuse terminal arborisa-
tion in the ipsilateral spinal cord grey matter (Fig. 3B). These termi-
nals were spread throughout the intermediate and ventral grey
matter (mainly in laminae V, VI and VII) on the right side of the
cord (ipsilateral to the labelled projection), with very few BDA-
labelled axons present in the unlabelled (left) side (Fig. 3B).
Following unilateral pyramidotomy and vehicle treatment, the
BDA-labelled intact CST projection pattern was similar to that
observed in sham controls and followed the normal pattern of CST
innervation, with the majority of labelled axon terminals observed
on the innervated (uninjured) side and very few fibres observed
crossing the midline into the denervated side at either the level of
the pyramidal decussation (Fig. 3C) or the cervical spinal cord
(Fig. 3D). In contrast, following unilateral pyramidotomy and treat-
ment with ChABC, there was a dramatic effect on sprouting of
BDA-labelled intact CST axons across the midline to branch into
the denervated side of the brainstem and spinal cord, with long,
branching BDA-labelled axons apparent in the denervated side at
the level of CST decussation (Fig. 3E), and robust sprouting of CST
axons observed in the cervical spinal cord, with numerous labelled
axons appearing to cross the midline to branch into the denervated
(left) side of the spinal cord within the intermediate and ventral grey
matter (Fig. 3F).
Quantification of CST midline crossing
CST sprouting measurements in the brainstem at the level of the
pyramidal decussation revealed that the number of BDA-labelled
CST axons on the denervated side was low when expressed as a
percentage of the labelled axons on the innervated side in the sham
(uninjured) group, and in animals with unilateral pyramidotomy and
vehicle treatment (13.0 ± 5.9 and 21.4 ± 5.0%, respectively;
Fig 3G). There was no significant difference between these two
groups (one-way ANOVA, F2,12 = 16.4, P = 0.23, Student–Newman–
Keuls post hoc tests). However, following unilateral pyramidotomy
plus ChABC treatment, the percentage of BDA-labelled CST axons
on the denervated side as a percentage of those on the innervated
side was significantly increased in comparison to both sham
and pyramidotomy plus vehicle values (46.35 ± 2.4%; one-way
ANOVA, F2,12 = 16.4, P < 0.001 and P = 0.002, respectively, Student
–Newman–Keuls post hoc tests; Fig 3G). Similarly, in the cervical
spinal cord, few BDA-labelled intact CST axons were observed on
the denervated side as compared with the labelled side in the sham
group, and in animals with unilateral pyramidotomy and vehicle
treatment (8.40 ± 3.9 and 15.60 ± 4.2%, respectively; Fig. 4H), and
there was no significant difference between the two groups (one-way
ANOVA, F2,12 = 7.2, P = 0.54). However, there was a robust increase
in BDA-labelled CST axons on the denervated side in the spinal
cord following unilateral pyramidotomy plus ChABC treatment
(48.43 ± 12.2%; significantly higher than sham values and pyramid-
otomy plus vehicle values; one-way ANOVA, F2,12 = 7.2, P = 0.013
and P = 0.009, respectively, Student–Newman–Keuls post hoc tests;
Fig. 3H). No differences in BDA intensity measurements between
groups were observed on the intact side of the spinal cord (mean
pixel intensity values: sham 16.65 ± 5.4, pyramidotomy plus vehicle
11.99 ± 2.1, pyramidotomy plus ChABC 13.47 ± 5.0; one-way
ANOVA, F2,12 = 0.3, P = 0.73) or the brainstem (mean pixel intensity
A
B
C
Fig. 2. Chondroitinase ABC (ChABC) promotes recovery of forelimb sym-
metry following unilateral pyramidotomy. During spontaneous vertical explo-
ration, uninjured (sham) mice use their left and right paws equally for weight
support when rearing, with no significant difference in paw usage throughout
the entire testing period (A). Following unilateral pyramidotomy, mice are
significantly impaired in their denervated forepaw and preferentially use the
intact (right) paw for weight support during rearing. In injured mice treated
with saline, this deficit is maintained throughout the testing period (B). In
contrast, injured mice treated with ChABC show a robust and significant
recovery of forelimb symmetry, with increased use of the denervated (left)
paw apparent over time, such that by 21 days post-injury there is no signifi-
cant difference in the use of left and right forepaws and a complete recovery
of forepaw symmetry is apparent by 5 weeks post-injury, which is main-
tained until the end of the testing period (C). Data are mean percentage paw
use ± SEM. Asterisks denote significant differences between left and right
paw use (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; two-way RM ANOVA, Student–Newman–
Keuls post hoc tests).
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3670 M. L. Starkey et al.
A B
C D
E F
G H
Fig. 3. Chondroitinase ABC (ChABC) promotes sprouting and midline crossing of the intact CST into denervated grey matter. BDA labelling of the CST in
transverse sections through the pyramidal decussation (A, C and E) and the C5 spinal cord (B, D and F) shows a normal innervation pattern in sham (uninjured)
animals (A and B), with a thick bundle of BDA-labelled CST axons at the level of decussation, with some collaterals branching off into grey matter in the right
side of the brainstem as the CST decussates from left to right, but minimal labelling in grey matter on the left side (A). A similar pattern is observed in the
brainstem of mice with unilateral pyramidotomy treated with vehicle (B). However, following unilateral pyramidotomy and ChABC treatment, numerous long-
branching axons are observed sprouting into the denervated (left) side of the brainstem (E). In the spinal cord of sham mice, CST axons are observed in the
labelled (right) side of the spinal cord in the right dorsal column, where this tract projects, and as arborising terminals in spinal grey matter on the right (inner-
vated) side (B). In vehicle-treated mice with a unilateral pyramidotomy (which denervates the left side of the cord) the pattern is similar to that of sham con-
trols, with the majority of labelling apparent on the right (intact) side of the cord and almost no midline crossing axons observed in the denervated (left) side
(D). In contrast, following ChABC treatment, numerous CST axons can be seen crossing the midline from the intact CST to branch into the denervated (left)
side of the spinal cord (F). Dashed lines in (D) and (F) represent the regions analysed in horizontal sections in Fig. 4. Mean pixel intensity measurements of
BDA labelling in the three treatment groups reveal a significant increase in labelled axons in the denervated grey matter at the level of the decussation (G), and
in the cervical spinal cord (H) following unilateral pyramidotomy and treatment with ChABC. Data are presented as mean pixel intensities ± SEM; asterisks
indicate significant group differences (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, one-way ANOVA, Student–Newman–Keuls post hoc tests). Scale bars represent:
500 lm.
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3671
sham 50.88 ± 6.7, pyramidotomy plus vehicle 41.56 ± 8.2, pyra-
midotomy plus ChABC 47.41 ± 6.3; one-way ANOVA, F2,12 = 0.4,
P = 0.68), indicating that ChABC treatment did not promote sprout-
ing within intact regions and that CST sprouting was specific to the
side that was denervated. However, it should be noted that due to
the high density of axons in the uninjured side, the optical measure-
ments used may not be robust enough to detect small increases in
axon numbers on the intact side.
We correlated the behavioural scores of individual animals (taken at
the 5-week time point, when forelimb symmetry had fully recovered)
with their CST sprouting measurements in the cervical spinal cord (%
left paw use was plotted against % sprouting in left spinal cord) for
lesioned animals treated with ChABC. There was a high correlation
between % paw use and % sprouting (R2 = 0.71), such that a high
symmetry score typically corresponded with increased sprouting.
To further analyse the pattern of CST sprouting, we examined
midline crossing in horizontal sections from lesioned animals at two
dorso-ventral levels of the spinal cord (Figs 3D and F, and Fig. 4).
In mice with a pyramidotomy lesion plus vehicle treatment, the
labelled bundle of CST axons could be seen projecting the length of
the dorsal columns, with many terminal arborisations projecting into
the grey matter ipsilateral to the labelled tract and very few BDA-
A B
C D
E F G H
Fig. 4. Midline crossing corticospinal tract (CST) fibres make synapses in the denervated spinal cord. Biotinylated dextran amine (BDA) labelling in horizontal
sections from lesioned animals at two dorso-ventral levels of the spinal cord (see Fig. 3D and F for location) revealed that following unilateral pyramidotomy
and vehicle treatment, very few fibres extend across the midline into the denervated (left) grey matter, either at the level of the descending CST tract (A) or in
lamina X below the central canal (C; arrows in A and C denote the few sprouting CST fibres that crossed the midline following vehicle treatment). In contrast,
following ChABC treatment, numerous BDA-labelled fibres were observed in the denervated (left) spinal cord grey matter at the level of the CST tract
(B; arrows), and CST sprouting was even more striking in lamina X grey matter, where robust CST innervation was apparent on both intact (right) and dener-
vated (left) sides of the spinal cord (D; arrows denote some of the many sprouting CST fibres that crossed the midline into denervated grey matter following
ChABC treatment). High-magnification confocal images show that many of the sprouting CST fibres on the denervated side of the spinal cord following ChABC
treatment bore synaptic elements (E–H; arrows show boutons co-localised with the presynaptic marker vGlut1, red, and BDA, green), indicating the presence of
anatomical synapses on sprouting CST fibres following ChABC treatment. Scale bars: 200 lm (A–D); 10 lm (E–H). GM, grey matter; WM, white matter.
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3672 M. L. Starkey et al.
labelled fibres apparent in the grey matter on the opposite (dener-
vated) side (Fig. 4A). In more ventral sections, beneath the main
CST projection and ventral to the central canal, again BDA-labelled
fibres were predominantly observed on the intact side, with very
few fibres observed crossing the midline (Fig. 4C). In contrast,
following pyramidotomy plus ChABC treatment, numerous BDA-
labelled fibres could be seen extending from the main CST projec-
tion across the midline into denervated grey matter in horizontal
sections of dorsal spinal cord (Fig. 4B). The effect was even more
striking in more ventral regions, immediately beneath the central
canal, where robust CST innervation was apparent on both intact
and denervated sides of the spinal cord (Fig. 4D). This indicates that
the majority of sprouting fibres cross the midline within the grey
matter region around lamina X, rather than across dorsal column
white matter. Confocal microscopy revealed that many of the BDA-
labelled fibres on the denervated side of the spinal cord following
ChABC treatment bore synaptic elements, as they co-localised with
the presynaptic marker vGlut1, indicating the presence of putative
anatomical synapses on sprouting CST fibres following ChABC
treatment (Fig. 4E–H). Because there were virtually no BDA fibres
observed on the denervated side following lesion and vehicle treat-
ment, we did not observe any co-labelled vGlut1-BDA axon vari-
cosities in this group (data not shown).
Assessing digestion of CSPGs following ChABC treatment
ChABC digests the CSPG-GAG side-chains attached to the protein
core of the CSPG molecule, which generates disaccharide ‘stubs’,
which remain on the proteoglycan core protein. These stubs can be
revealed by immunohistochemical staining with the C-4-S antibody,
which does not recognise intact chondroitin sulphate and thus is
present only where CSPGs have been successfully degraded. In
serial sections through the cervical spinal cord, there was no positive
immunofluorescence for C-4-S in sham mice (data not shown) or
lesioned mice that were treated with saline (Fig. 5A). In contrast,
following pyramidotomy and I.C.V. delivery of ChABC, intense
C-4-S immunofluorescence was apparent throughout the cervical
cord at 11 days post-surgery (i.e. the day after the final ChABC
administration), with intense C-4-S immunoreactivity observed in
spinal white matter and, although more diffusely, throughout the
spinal grey matter, with more intense digestion in several grey mat-
ter areas, such as lamina X (around the central canal), the region
where the majority of sprouting fibres crossed the midline, and in
the ventral horn and intermediate grey matter, the target of midline
crossing axons (Fig. 5B). Quantification of C-4-S intensity in three
grey matter regions confirmed negligible C-4-S immunoreactivity in
spinal grey matter following vehicle treatment, and a significant
increase in C-4-S intensity following ChABC treatment (significant
difference between vehicle and ChABC treatment; two-way ANOVA,
F12 = 110.1, P < 0.001; and within each analysis area, P < 0.001
box 1 and 3, P = 0.017 box 2, Student–Newman–Keuls post hoc
tests; Fig. 5C). To assess whether CS-GAG digestion observed at
the end of ChABC administration led to long-term changes in spinal
grey matter CSPGs, reactivity for WFA, a marker for CSPG-rich
PNNs (Pizzorusso et al., 2002), was examined at 9 weeks
post-injury. In mice treated with vehicle, abundant WFA labelling
A B
C D E
Fig. 5. I.C.V. delivery of chondroitinase ABC (ChABC) degrades CSPGs in spinal cord white and grey matter. C-4-S immunohistochemistry to identify CSPG
digestion in transverse sections of the C5 spinal cord at 11 days post-surgery (i.e. following 10 days of ChABC delivery) show no digested CSPGs in tissue
from mice with unilateral pyramidotomy treated with saline (A). In contrast, intense immunoreactivity for C-4-S was apparent following unilateral pyramidoto-
my and I.C.V. delivery of ChABC (B), with intense digestion apparent in spinal cord white matter and, although more diffusely, throughout the spinal grey
matter. Intensity measurements confirmed significant CSPG digestion following ChABC treatment compared with vehicle treatment in three grey matter regions
where CST sprouting was observed: around lamina X (box 1) and in the intermediate (box 2) and ventral (box 3) grey matter (C). WFA histochemistry for
CSPG-rich PNNs in lesioned mice at 9 weeks post-injury revealed abundant WFA labelling around spinal neurons in the intermediate and ventral grey matter
in vehicle-treated mice (D; WFA in red and DAPI in blue). In contrast, WFA reactivity was largely absent around spinal grey matter neurons following ChABC
treatment (E; regions in D and E are equivalent to the box 2 area in A and B), revealing that I.C.V. ChABC treatment leads to long-term changes in spinal grey
matter CSPGs. Scale bars: 500 lm (A, B); 20 lm (D, E).
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3673
was observed around many spinal neurons in the ventral and inter-
mediate grey matter (Fig. 5D). In contrast, WFA reactivity was lar-
gely absent from the spinal grey matter in mice treated with ChABC
(Fig. 5E), indicating that treatment with ChABC led to long-lasting
degradation of CSPGs in spinal grey matter areas where sprouting
fibres were observed.
To further examine the relationship between CSPG digestion and
CST sprouting, we looked at the rostro-caudal pattern of C-4-S
immunoreactivity in the cervical spinal cord at 11 days, and CST
sprouting in corresponding regions at 9 weeks (Fig. 6). The pattern
of CSPG digestion was similar at all levels of the cervical enlarge-
ment, with intense C-4-S reactivity observed in white and grey mat-
ter (Fig. 6A and C). Correspondingly, CST sprouting was observed
at all cervical levels, with numerous BDA-labelled fibres crossing
the midline into denervated grey matter apparent at both high
(Fig. 6B) and low (Fig. 6D) cervical levels. High-power images
confirmed intense digestion of CSPGs in lamina X (Fig. 6E and G),
the region of the grey matter where the majority of sprouting fibres
crossed the midline (Fig. 6F and H).
Discussion
In this study we demonstrate for the first time that degrading CSPGs
in the spinal cord can promote midline crossing of intact CST axons
into denervated areas of the spinal cord following unilateral pyra-
midotomy, and that this compensatory sprouting is associated with
recovery of forepaw function. BDA-labelled intact CST axons were
only observed to cross the midline into denervated spinal cord terri-
tory following lesion and ChABC treatment, with almost exclusively
unilateral innervation observed in control-treated lesioned mice.
Accordingly, while the denervated forepaw of control-treated ani-
mals remained permanently impaired, animals treated with ChABC
gained full recovery of forepaw symmetry. CSPGs were digested
throughout the brainstem and cervical spinal cord following ChABC
treatment, and PNN CSPGs were also reduced around spinal neu-
rons in regions containing sprouting axons. Sprouting CST fibres
expressed vGlut1, suggesting that they had made synaptic connec-
tions in denervated regions of the spinal cord. Thus, CSPG digestion
can enable compensatory sprouting of the intact CST, which leads
to restored function in the denervated forepaw.
Compensatory sprouting of the intact CST following unilateral
pyramidotomy and ChABC treatment
ChABC has previously been shown to promote regeneration of
descending spinal axons (Bradbury et al., 2002; Houle et al., 2006;
Iseda et al., 2008; Alilain et al., 2011) and to be neuroprotective for
long-range descending spinal projection neurons (Carter et al., 2008,
2011) following spinal cord injury. However, whether ChABC can
promote functional reorganisation of the intact CST following uni-
lateral CST transaction has not been demonstrated until now. Previ-
ous findings from our lab and others (Barritt et al., 2006; Garcia-
Alias et al., 2008, 2009; Karimi-Abdolrezaee et al., 2010; Zhao
et al., 2011) have shown CST axon sprouting following spinal cord
injury and ChABC treatment. However, in these studies the CST
was transected bilaterally in the dorsal columns, making it difficult
to distinguish whether the observed growth was due to regenerating
or sprouting transected axons and/or sprouting ventral and lateral
CST components, which are largely spared by the injury, or a com-
bination of these. The unilateral pyramidotomy model, whereby the
CST on one side is transected at the level of the pyramids so that
only one CST projection remains in the spinal cord, enables the
A B
C D
E F G H
Fig. 6. CSPG digestion is associated with CST sprouting throughout the cervical enlargement. The rostrocaudal pattern of CSPG degradation at 11 days post-
injury (A and C) and CST sprouting at 9 weeks post-injury (B and D) were assessed throughout the cervical enlargement. I.C.V. delivery of ChABC led to
CSPG degradation throughout the neuraxis, with comparable levels of digestion observed from high (C1, A) to low (C5, C) segments of the cervical enlarge-
ment. Correspondingly, the pattern of CST sprouting was comparable throughout the cervical enlargement, with numerous CST axons observed crossing the
midline within lamina X and sprouting into intermediate and ventral grey matter regions on the denervated (left) side of the spinal cord, apparent from high
(C1, B) to low (C5, D) cervical cord segments. High-power images of lamina X reveal intense C-4-S immunoreactivity (E and G), precisely in the region where
sprouting axons crossed the midline (F and H). Scale bars: 500 lm (A–D); 100 lm (E–H).
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3674 M. L. Starkey et al.
specific study of compensatory sprouting of uninjured axons and
has previously been used to demonstrate enhanced plasticity follow-
ing neutralisation of myelin inhibitors (Thallmair et al., 1998;
Z’Graggen et al., 1998; Raineteau et al., 1999; Cafferty & Strittmat-
ter, 2006; Lee et al., 2010). In the present study, robust growth of
intact CST axons across the midline into denervated spinal cord
grey matter was observed following ChABC treatment demonstrat-
ing that, along with myelin inhibitors, CSPGs also play an important
role in restricting plasticity of intact motor systems following injury.
It remains to be seen whether combining Nogo-A neutralisation with
CSPG degradation could synergistically enhance the potential for
plasticity. Other strategies that can induce midline crossing of the
intact CST following unilateral pyramidotomy include boosting the
sprouting potential of CST axons with growth-promoting factors,
such as neurotrophin-3 expressed in the denervated ventral horn
(Zhou & Shine, 2003) or intracellular neuronal calcium sensor-1
expressed in corticospinal projection neurons (Yip et al., 2010). Fur-
thermore, CST midline crossing can also be stimulated by activity-
based therapies, such as forced use of the impaired forelimb (Maier
et al., 2008), reinforcement training on specific tasks (Starkey et al.,
2011), or electrical stimulation of CST axons (Brus-Ramer et al.,
2007) or the motor cortex (Carmel et al., 2010). These studies indi-
cate that the presence of inhibitory factors and the lack of a stimulus
to grow inhibit an inherent ability for intact CST axons to undergo
plastic changes following injury. Indeed there is now much evidence
for some degree of spontaneous reorganisation of spinal circuits fol-
lowing spinal cord injury. For example, spontaneous sprouting of
the CST, leading to remodelling and new circuit formation, has been
observed in both rodents (Weidner et al., 2001; Bareyre et al.,
2004; Lang et al., 2012) and primates (Courtine et al., 2008; Rosen-
zweig et al., 2010) following partial spinal cord lesions. However,
despite the evidence for spontaneous reorganisation of spinal cir-
cuitry, the extent of this reorganisation is limited and strategies that
enhance this potential, such as CSPG modification, could be crucial
for restoring useful recovery of function following injury.
Interestingly, environmental factors such as rearing conditions
have been suggested to have an effect on the extent of midline
sprouting that occurs following pyramidotomy and experimental
intervention, with lower sprouting observed in treated animals that
were single housed compared with group-housed animals (Benowitz,
2012; Steward et al., 2012). In the present study, mice were single
housed throughout. Thus, it is possible that more extensive sprout-
ing would have occurred had they been group housed and that we
may have underestimated the full extent of sprouting that can be
achieved with ChABC treatment.
Recovery of forelimb function following unilateral
pyramidotomy and ChABC treatment
Unilateral pyramidotomy in mice caused a substantial impairment in
forepaw usage for weight support in the rearing test. Lesioned mice
used their left (lesioned CST) forepaw considerably less often than
their right (intact CST) forepaw for weight support on the cylinder
wall. In mice that received saline, this deficit persisted for the entire
testing period (6 weeks), in agreement with our previous demonstra-
tion that mice do not recover impaired forelimb function in the rear-
ing task following unilateral pyramidotomy (Starkey et al., 2005).
In contrast, mice receiving ChABC showed a full recovery of fore-
paw symmetry in the rearing task, which was evident by 21 days
post-injury and sustained for the entire testing period. Thus, ChABC
delivery over the first 10 days following injury has long-lasting
effects on axonal sprouting and functional recovery. The time course
of recovery most likely reflects a period of continued axon growth
following the 10 days of ChABC treatment followed by a period of
reinnervation of denervated target neurons in spinal grey matter by
the sprouting axons. This is similar to the observations of Carmel
et al. (2010) where electrical stimulation was applied to the forelimb
area of the motor cortex for the first 10 days following unilateral
pyramidotomy, and recovery of forelimb function occurred at a later
time point, with significant improvements observed from 20 days
after the injury and maintained until the end of the testing period.
Robust outgrowth of CST axons was also observed in this study, to
a similar degree to the observed sprouting in the present study, pro-
viding an anatomical substrate for the motor recovery observed. It is
not known whether ChABC treatment would have improved other
forelimb functions in the present study, as mice were only assessed
on the vertical exploration task (selected because we have previ-
ously shown that it is a robust test for revealing deficits in forelimb
asymmetry following unilateral pyramidotomy in mice; Starkey
et al., 2005). However, it is possible that more complex forelimb
functions such as reaching and grasping would also be improved
following ChABC treatment, as similar functional recovery was
recently demonstrated in a unilateral stroke model following ChABC
treatment, with improvements observed in forelimb symmetry during
rearing, and the same animals also showing improved function on a
pellet retrieval task requiring fine motor control (Soleman et al.,
2012).
CSPG degradation following unilateral pyramidotomy and
ChABC treatment
We assessed the extent and rostrocaudal pattern of CSPG digestion
throughout the cervical enlargement. I.C.V. delivery of ChABC led
to CSPG degradation throughout the neuraxis, and was particularly
prominent in spinal cord white matter tracts. Digested CSPGs were
also apparent in spinal cord grey matter, particularly in regions such
as lamina X, where sprouting axons crossed the midline, and in the
intermediate and ventral grey matter, where sprouting axons were
observed and were associated with synaptic elements. CSPGs are
known to be upregulated in glial scar extracellular matrix following
spinal cord injury, particularly at the site of injury (Jones et al.,
2003; Tang et al., 2003; Iaci et al., 2007). Similarly, a CSPG-rich
glial scar also forms at the injury site following pyramidotomy,
demonstrated in cats (Tolbert & Der, 1987), hamsters (Kalil & Reh,
1982) and rodents (Leong et al., 1995; Z’Graggen et al., 2000;
Cafferty & Strittmatter, 2006). However, as well as upregulation at
CNS injury sites, CSPG expression is also known to increase in
denervated targets following injury (Massey et al., 2008; Andrews
et al., 2012), and this is thought to play a role in inhibiting the
sprouting of spared sensory projections into brainstem targets and
the reinnervation of target neurons by regenerating axons (Massey
et al., 2006). Furthermore, recent findings have shown that CSPGs
at sites far distal to the injury remain increased for long periods, and
suggest that the long-lasting elevation of CSPGs such as neurocan
in distal spinal cord grey matter may contribute to the restriction of
plasticity into chronic phases of injury and that therapies targeting
CSPGs both at and distal to the injury site would be beneficial
(Andrews et al., 2012). In agreement with these observations, I.C.V.
delivery of ChABC in the present study allowed CSPG digestion
along the neuraxis, with comparable digestion observed throughout
the cervical enlargement, indicating that targeting CSPGs along the
neuraxis enabled sprouting at many cervical levels, as shown by the
comparable CST sprouting we observed from high (C1) to low (C7)
cervical segments. Interestingly, the intense C-4-S immunoreactivity
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3675
observed around the spinal cord central canal (in lamina X) was in
precisely the region where intact CST fibres crossed the midline,
indicating that reduced inhibition at this crucial crossing point could
be an important factor for stimulating sprouting across the midline
and that CSPG digestion at inhibitory boundaries, as well as within
target regions, may be an important factor. It should be noted that
the observations of CSPG digestion patterns were made at only one
post-injury time point, following the last administration of ChABC
(day 11), and that CSPG digestion and changes in intact PNN
CSPGs may have occurred elsewhere along the neuraxis, or indeed
been stronger in grey matter regions, at some of the later time points
(such as 2–5 weeks), during the time period when significant func-
tional recovery began to occur.
Targets of midline crossing sprouts and underlying
mechanisms
The present study correlates a robust sprouting response of intact
CST axons with recovery of forelimb function. In line with many
previous studies investigating CST plasticity after unilateral pyra-
midotomy (Thallmair et al., 1998; Raineteau et al., 1999; Zhou
et al., 2003; Cafferty & Strittmatter, 2006; Lee et al., 2010), we
performed both anatomical and functional studies, and have demon-
strated that there is a strong correlation between CST sprouting in
the denervated spinal cord and recovery of function in denervated
forelimb. However, it is possible that other uninjured systems may
also have contributed to the functional repair. For example, compen-
satory sprouting of the intact rubrospinal tract may have occurred,
as has previously been demonstrated following anti-Nogo therapy
(Raineteau et al., 2002). A lesion of the intact pyramid once fore-
limb function had recovered may have definitively demonstrated
whether recovery of function was dependent upon intact CST
sprouting in the present study. However, the evidence for functional
repair being associated with robust CST sprouting, plus the demon-
stration that sprouting CST fibres were associated with synaptic ele-
ments, provides strong evidence that functional recovery was due, at
least in part, to compensatory sprouting of the intact CST. Currently
it is not clear what the targets of midline crossing CST axons are.
The targets of the midline crossing CST axons in the spinal cord are
likely to be local or long interneurons, as they were observed pre-
dominantly in the intermediate lamina of the cervical spinal cord.
This would be in line with the findings of Bareyre et al. (2004)
who proposed a mechanism via which the observed spontaneous
sprouting of lesioned axons might contribute to functional recovery
in the absence of long-distance regeneration. In this study they
showed evidence of the formation of new intraspinal circuits follow-
ing midthoracic dorsal hemisection, and reported that the hindlimb
CST collaterals sprout into the cervical gray matter where they con-
tact both long and short descending propriospinal neurons through
which they are able to bypass the lesion site and reconnect the tran-
sected CST to the lumbar spinal cord avoiding the lesion site. Thus,
the removal of inhibitory CSPGs with ChABC may lead to an
enhancement of de novo intraspinal circuits, which could underlie
the observed functional improvements.
While the focus of the present study was on the main CST com-
ponent that runs in the dorsal columns, it is also possible that minor
CST components may have contributed to the increased fibre growth
into the denervated spinal cord, particularly because the dorsolateral
CST and ventral CST both project in white matter tracts that were
heavily digested following ChABC treatment. However, the vast
majority of fibres observed in the denervated grey matter following
ChABC did not appear to originate from the lateral or ventral
columns, but stemmed from the main CST at the base of the dorsal
columns where they crossed under the central canal and then
appeared to either fan out or remain relatively localised to the spinal
cord midline. Thus, it is likely that the majority of labelled CST
fibres did indeed sprout from the main CST component and not the
minor components. It is also possible that sprouting of other (unla-
belled) pathways may have contributed to the observed functional
recovery. For example, CSPGs were heavily digested in the lateral
columns that contain the rubrospinal tract projection, another impor-
tant motor pathway. Thus, as mentioned above, increased arborisa-
tion of intact rubrospinal tract axons that terminate in intermediate
grey matter could also have contributed to functional recovery.
There is also a possibility that some reorganisation in higher centres
may have occurred, similar to the novel connections to the red
nucleus and pontomedullary formation arising from the damaged
CST that were observed following pyramidotomy and anti-Nogo-A
antibody treatment (Thallmair et al., 1998). However, as re-lesioning
the pyramidal tract caudal to the original pyramidotomy did not
impact the recovery of function in this study, it was thought that
these novel connections did not significantly impact behavioural
function. Thus, although we cannot rule out the possibility that
reorganisation of other intact pathways in the spinal cord and/or
reorganisation of lesioned projections in the brain may have
occurred, nevertheless the current data provide a robust association
between midline crossing of intact CST axons into denervated spinal
grey matter and functional recovery of the denervated forepaw.
As well as sprouting of the intact CST, it is also possible that
some regeneration of the lesioned CST may have occurred at the
injury site. However, even if some regeneration of the injured CST
had occurred, it is unlikely that the recovery of the denervated fore-
paw was due to long-distance functional regeneration of the lesioned
CST, as the 3 weeks post-injury time point at which we first saw
significantly improved function is likely to be too early to attribute
to long-distance regeneration and reinnervation of appropriate tar-
gets. Similarly, previous studies where the inhibitory myelin protein
Nogo-A was targeted following pyramidotomy in rats have reported
either no evidence of regeneration through the lesion site (Z’Grag-
gen et al., 1998) or some limited regenerative growth at the lesion
site but no long-distance regeneration (Thallmair et al., 1998). The
weak regenerative response in this model following neutralisation of
inhibitory proteins is thought to be due to regenerating axons having
difficulty navigating through the pyramidal decussation (Thallmair
et al., 1998).
Finally, because CSPGs were heavily digested throughout the
neuraxis, it is also possible that sprouting or reorganisation may
have occurred in areas of the CNS other than those studied or may
have occurred simply as a result of CSPG digestion alone, unrelated
to any injury stimulus. However, we observed no increase in CST
innervation on the intact side of the spinal cord, which was equally
treated with ChABC. This is in line with previous work from our
lab which has shown that despite CSPG degradation in multiple
regions, a sprouting response was only observed in areas that were
denervated or injured (Barritt et al., 2006; Cafferty et al., 2008).
Furthermore, ChABC treatment alone (i.e. delivered to naive rats
with no injury) has been demonstrated to have no effect on CST ter-
mination patterns in the cervical spinal cord (Barritt et al., 2006) or
on sensory afferent innervation of the dorsal horn, despite extensive
CSPG degradation in these regions (Cafferty et al., 2008), suggest-
ing that ChABC treatment does not lead to uncontrolled widespread
sprouting of uninjured systems along the neuraxis, but enables a
specific response to an injury stimulus that is normally suppressed
by CSPGs. Similar observations have been reported for other
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3676 M. L. Starkey et al.
sprouting-inducing therapies. For example, gene delivery of NT-3
into the ventral horn of the spinal cord promoted CST sprouting
across the midline only when the spinal cord was denervated by
unilateral pyramidotomy, with no midline crossing observed in
uninjured animals that were treated with NT-3 (Zhou et al., 2003).
These data imply that there is a natural response for axons to sprout
after injury, which is normally suppressed, but can be unmasked by
removing inhibitors or delivering growth factors. Thus, the sprouting
responses induced by reducing inhibitory CSPGs in the present
study are likely to be localised to grey matter areas denervated by
the pyramidotomy, as was observed with the CST midline crossing.
Thus, we provide robust evidence that CSPGs play an important
role in restricting plasticity following a denervating injury, and that
reducing CSPG inhibition by enzymatic digestion with ChABC can
enhance compensatory sprouting of an uninjured descending spinal
projection, leading to recovery of forelimb function. This approach
may form part of a future therapeutic strategy for promoting recov-
ery of function following disorders such as stroke and spinal cord
injury.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the UK Medical Research Council, the Interna-
tional Spinal Research Trust and the Henry Smith Charity. The authors
would like to thank Patrick Doherty and Michaela Thallmair for advice and
comments, Tim Boucher for critical evaluation of the manuscript, and John
Grist, Jonathan Ramsey and Meirion Davies for technical support.
Abbreviations
BDA, biotinylated dextran amine; C-4-S, chondroitin-4-sulphate; ChABC,
chondroitinase ABC; CSPG, chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan; CST, corti-
cospinal tract; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; GAG, glycosaminoglycan;
I.C.V., intracerebroventricular; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; PFA, parafor-
maldehyde; PKC-c, c-subunit of protein kinase C; PNN, peri-neuronal
net; RM, repeated measures; TRITC, tetramethylrhodamine-5-(and 6)-isothio-
cyanate; WFA, Wisteria floribunda agglutinin.
References
Alilain, W.J., Horn, K.P., Hu, H., Dick, T.E. & Silver, J. (2011) Functional
regeneration of respiratory pathways after spinal cord injury. Nature, 475,
196–200.
Andrews, E.M., Richards, R.J., Yin, F.Q., Viapiano, M.S. & Jakeman, L.B.
(2012) Alterations in chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan expression occur
both at and far from the site of spinal contusion injury. Exp. Neurol., 235,
174–187.
Bareyre, F.M. & Schwab, M.E. (2003) Inflammation, degeneration and
regeneration in the injured spinal cord: insights from DNA microarrays.
Trends Neurosci., 26, 555–563.
Bareyre, F.M., Kerschensteiner, M., Raineteau, O., Mettenleiter, T.C., Wein-
mann, O. & Schwab, M.E. (2004) The injured spinal cord spontaneously
forms a new intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat. Neurosci., 7, 269–277.
Barritt, A.W., Davies, M., Marchand, F., Hartley, R., Grist, J., Yip, P.,
McMahon, S.B. & Bradbury, E.J. (2006) Chondroitinase ABC promotes
sprouting of intact and injured spinal systems after spinal cord injury.
J. Neurosci., 26, 10856–10867.
Bartus, K., James, N.D., Bosch, K.D. & Bradbury, E.J. (2011) Chondroitin
sulphate proteoglycans: key modulators of spinal cord and brain plasticity.
Exp. Neurol., 235, 5–17.
Benowitz, L. (2012) Author’s response to Steward et al., “A re-assessment
of the effects of intra-cortical delivery of inosine….”. Exp. Neurol., 233,
674–676.
Bradbury, E.J. & Carter, L.M. (2011) Manipulating the glial scar: chondroitin-
ase ABC as a therapy for spinal cord injury. Brain Res. Bull., 84, 306–316.
Bradbury, E.J. & McMahon, S.B. (2006) Spinal cord repair strategies: why
do they work? Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 7, 644–653.
Bradbury, E.J., Moon, L.D., Popat, R.J., King, V.R., Bennett, G.S., Patel, P.
N., Fawcett, J.W. & McMahon, S.B. (2002) Chondroitinase ABC promotes
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature, 416, 636–640.
Brus-Ramer, M., Carmel, J.B., Chakrabarty, S. & Martin, J.H. (2007)
Electrical stimulation of spared corticospinal axons augments connections
with ipsilateral spinal motor circuits after injury. J. Neurosci., 27, 13793–
13801.
Cafferty, W.B. & Strittmatter, S.M. (2006) The Nogo-Nogo receptor pathway
limits a spectrum of adult CNS axonal growth. J. Neurosci., 26, 12242–
12250.
Cafferty, W.B., Bradbury, E.J., Lidierth, M., Jones, M., Duffy, P.J., Pezet, S.
& McMahon, S.B. (2008) Chondroitinase ABC-mediated plasticity of
spinal sensory function. J. Neurosci., 28, 11998–12009.
Caggiano, A.O., Zimber, M.P., Ganguly, A., Blight, A.R. & Gruskin, E.A.
(2005) Chondroitinase ABCI improves locomotion and bladder function fol-
lowing contusion injury of the rat spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma, 22, 226–239.
Carmel, J.B., Berrol, L.J., Brus-Ramer, M. & Martin, J.H. (2010) Chronic
electrical stimulation of the intact corticospinal system after unilateral
injury restores skilled locomotor control and promotes spinal axon out-
growth. J. Neurosci., 30, 10918–10926.
Carter, L.M., Starkey, M.L., Akrimi, S.F., Davies, M., McMahon, S.B. &
Bradbury, E.J. (2008) The yellow fluorescent protein (YFP-H) mouse
reveals neuroprotection as a novel mechanism underlying chondroitinase
ABC-mediated repair after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci., 28, 14107–
14120.
Carter, L.M., McMahon, S.B. & Bradbury, E.J. (2011) Delayed treatment
with Chondroitinase ABC reverses chronic atrophy of rubrospinal neurons
following spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol., 228, 149–156.
Corvetti, L. & Rossi, F. (2005) Degradation of chondroitin sulfate proteogly-
cans induces sprouting of intact purkinje axons in the cerebellum of the
adult rat. J. Neurosci., 25, 7150–7158.
Courtine, G., Song, B., Roy, R.R., Zhong, H., Herrmann, J.E., Ao, Y., Qi,
J., Edgerton, V.R. & Sofroniew, M.V. (2008) Recovery of supraspinal
control of stepping via indirect propriospinal relay connections after spinal
cord injury. Nat. Med., 14, 69–74.
Fawcett, J.W. (2006) Overcoming inhibition in the damaged spinal cord.
J. Neurotrauma, 23, 371–383.
Fouad, K., Schnell, L., Bunge, M.B., Schwab, M.E., Liebscher, T. & Pearse,
D.D. (2005) Combining Schwann cell bridges and olfactory-ensheathing
glia grafts with chondroitinase promotes locomotor recovery after complete
transection of the spinal cord. J. Neurosci., 25, 1169–1178.
Garcia-Alias, G., Lin, R., Akrimi, S.F., Story, D., Bradbury, E.J. & Fawcett,
J.W. (2008) Therapeutic time window for the application of chondroitinase
ABC after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol., 210, 331–338.
Garcia-Alias, G., Barkhuysen, S., Buckle, M. & Fawcett, J.W. (2009) Chon-
droitinase ABC treatment opens a window of opportunity for task-specific
rehabilitation. Nat. Neurosci., 12, 1145–1151.
Goldberg, J.L., Vargas, M.E., Wang, J.T., Mandemakers, W., Oster, S.F.,
Sretavan, D.W. & Barres, B.A. (2004) An oligodendrocyte lineage-specific
semaphorin, Sema5A, inhibits axon growth by retinal ganglion cells.
J. Neurosci., 24, 4989–4999.
Hockfield, S., Kalb, R.G., Zaremba, S. & Fryer, H. (1990) Expression of
neural proteoglycans correlates with the acquisition of mature neuronal
properties in the mammalian brain. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol.,
55, 505–514.
Houle, J.D., Tom, V.J., Mayes, D., Wagoner, G., Phillips, N. & Silver, J.
(2006) Combining an autologous peripheral nervous system “bridge” and
matrix modification by chondroitinase allows robust, functional regenera-
tion beyond a hemisection lesion of the adult rat spinal cord. J. Neurosci.,
26, 7405–7415.
Iaci, J.F., Vecchione, A.M., Zimber, M.P. & Caggiano, A.O. (2007) Chon-
droitin sulfate proteoglycans in spinal cord contusion injury and the effects
of chondroitinase treatment. J. Neurotrauma, 24, 1743–1759.
Iseda, T., Okuda, T., Kane-Goldsmith, N., Mathew, M., Ahmed, S., Chang,
Y.W., Young, W. & Grumet, M. (2008) Single, high-dose intraspinal
injection of chondroitinase reduces glycosaminoglycans in injured spinal
cord and promotes corticospinal axonal regrowth after hemisection but not
contusion. J. Neurotrauma, 25, 334–349.
Jones, L.L., Margolis, R.U. & Tuszynski, M.H. (2003) The chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycans neurocan, brevican, phosphacan, and versican are differen-
tially regulated following spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol., 182, 399–411.
Kalil, K. & Reh, T. (1982) A light and electron microscopic study
of regrowing pyramidal tract fibers. J. Comp. Neurol., 211, 265–275.
Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S., Eftekharpour, E., Wang, J., Schut, D. & Fehlings,
M.G. (2010) Synergistic effects of transplanted adult neural stem/progeni-
tor cells, chondroitinase, and growth factors promote functional repair and
plasticity of the chronically injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci., 30, 1657–
1676.
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
Chondroitinase promotes corticospinal tract plasticity 3677
Kwok, J.C., Afshari, F., Garcia-Alias, G. & Fawcett, J.W. (2008) Proteogly-
cans in the central nervous system: plasticity, regeneration and their stimu-
lation with chondroitinase ABC. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci., 26, 131–145.
Lang, C., Guo, X., Kerschensteiner, M. & Bareyre, F.M. (2012) Single col-
lateral reconstructions reveal distinct phases of corticospinal remodeling
after spinal cord injury. PLoS One, 7, e30461.
Lee, J.K., Geoffroy, C.G., Chan, A.F., Tolentino, K.E., Crawford, M.J., Leal,
M.A., Kang, B. & Zheng, B. (2010) Assessing spinal axon regeneration
and sprouting in Nogo-, MAG-, and OMgp-deficient mice. Neuron, 66,
663–670.
Leong, S.K., Ling, E.A. & Fan, D.P. (1995) Glial reaction after pyramidoto-
my in mice and rats. Neurodegeneration, 4, 403–413.
Liu, Y., Kim, D., Himes, B.T., Chow, S.Y., Schallert, T., Murray, M., Tess-
ler, A. & Fischer, I. (1999) Transplants of fibroblasts genetically modified
to express BDNF promote regeneration of adult rat rubrospinal axons and
recovery of forelimb function. J. Neurosci., 19, 4370–4387.
Maier, I.C., Baumann, K., Thallmair, M., Weinmann, O., Scholl, J. &
Schwab, M.E. (2008) Constraint-induced movement therapy in the adult
rat after unilateral corticospinal tract injury. J. Neurosci., 28, 9386–9403.
Massey, J.M., Hubscher, C.H., Wagoner, M.R., Decker, J.A., Amps, J.,
Silver, J. & Onifer, S.M. (2006) Chondroitinase ABC digestion of the
perineuronal net promotes functional collateral sprouting in the cuneate
nucleus after cervical spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci., 26, 4406–4414.
Massey, J.M., Amps, J., Viapiano, M.S., Matthews, R.T., Wagoner, M.R.,
Whitaker, C.M., Alilain, W., Yonkof, A.L., Khalyfa, A., Cooper, N.G.,
Silver, J. & Onifer, S.M. (2008) Increased chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
expression in denervated brainstem targets following spinal cord injury
creates a barrier to axonal regeneration overcome by chondroitinase ABC
and neurotrophin-3. Exp. Neurol., 209, 426–445.
Neumann, S. & Woolf, C.J. (1999) Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into
and beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron, 23,
83–91.
Pizzorusso, T., Medini, P., Berardi, N., Chierzi, S., Fawcett, J.W. & Maffei,
L. (2002) Reactivation of ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual
cortex. Science, 298, 1248–1251.
Plunet, W., Kwon, B.K. & Tetzlaff, W. (2002) Promoting axonal regenera-
tion in the central nervous system by enhancing the cell body response to
axotomy. J. Neurosci. Res., 68, 1–6.
Raineteau, O., Z’Graggen, W.J., Thallmair, M. & Schwab, M.E. (1999)
Sprouting and regeneration after pyramidotomy and blockade of the mye-
lin-associated neurite growth inhibitors NI 35/250 in adult rats. Eur.
J. Neurosci., 11, 1486–1490.
Raineteau, O., Fouad, K., Bareyre, F.M. & Schwab, M.E. (2002) Reorganiza-
tion of descending motor tracts in the rat spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci.,
16, 1761–1771.
Rosenzweig, E.S., Courtine, G., Jindrich, D.L., Brock, J.H., Ferguson, A.R.,
Strand, S.C., Nout, Y.S., Roy, R.R., Miller, D.M., Beattie, M.S., Havton,
L.A., Bresnahan, J.C., Edgerton, V.R. & Tuszynski, M.H. (2010) Exten-
sive spontaneous plasticity of corticospinal projections after primate spinal
cord injury. Nat. Neurosci., 13, 1505–1510.
Schallert, T., Fleming, S.M., Leasure, J.L., Tillerson, J.L. & Bland, S.T.
(2000) CNS plasticity and assessment of forelimb sensorimotor outcome
in unilateral rat models of stroke, cortical ablation, parkinsonism and
spinal cord injury. Neuropharmacology, 39, 777–787.
Schwab, M.E. (2010) Functions of Nogo proteins and their receptors in the
nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 11, 799–811.
Silver, J. & Miller, J.H. (2004) Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci., 5, 146–156.
Soleman, S., Yip, P.K., Duricki, D.A. & Moon, L.D. (2012) Delayed treat-
ment with chondroitinase ABC promotes sensorimotor recovery and plas-
ticity after stroke in aged rats. Brain, 135, 1210–1223.
Starkey, M.L., Barritt, A.W., Yip, P.K., Davies, M., Hamers, F.P., McMa-
hon, S.B. & Bradbury, E.J. (2005) Assessing behavioural function follow-
ing a pyramidotomy lesion of the corticospinal tract in adult mice. Exp.
Neurol., 195, 524–539.
Starkey, M.L., Bleul, C., Maier, I.C. & Schwab, M.E. (2011) Rehabilitative
training following unilateral pyramidotomy in adult rats improves forelimb
function in a non-task-specific way. Exp. Neurol., 232, 81–89.
Steward, O., Sharp, K. & Yee, K.M. (2012) A re-assessment of the effects
of intracortical delivery of inosine on transmidline growth of corticospinal
tract axons after unilateral lesions of the medullary pyramid. Exp. Neurol.,
233, 662–673.
Tang, X., Davies, J.E. & Davies, S.J. (2003) Changes in distribution, cell
associations, and protein expression levels of NG2, neurocan, phosphacan,
brevican, versican V2, and tenascin-C during acute to chronic maturation
of spinal cord scar tissue. J. Neurosci. Res., 71, 427–444.
Tester, N.J. & Howland, D.R. (2008) Chondroitinase ABC improves basic and
skilled locomotion in spinal cord injured cats. Exp. Neurol., 209, 483–496.
Thallmair, M., Metz, G.A., Z’Graggen, W.J., Raineteau, O., Kartje, G.L. &
Schwab, M.E. (1998) Neurite growth inhibitors restrict plasticity and
functional recovery following corticospinal tract lesions. Nat. Neurosci., 1,
124–131.
Tolbert, D.L. & Der, T. (1987) Redirected growth of pyramidal tract axons fol-
lowing neonatal pyramidotomy in cats. J. Comp. Neurol., 260, 299–311.
Tom, V.J., Kadakia, R., Santi, L. & Houle, J.D. (2009a) Administration of
chondroitinase ABC rostral or caudal to a spinal cord injury site promotes
anatomical but not functional plasticity. J. Neurotrauma, 26, 2323–2333.
Tom, V.J., Sandrow-Feinberg, H.R., Miller, K., Santi, L., Connors, T.,
Lemay, M.A. & Houle, J.D. (2009b) Combining peripheral nerve grafts
and chondroitinase promotes functional axonal regeneration in the chroni-
cally injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci., 29, 14881–14890.
Tropea, D., Caleo, M. & Maffei, L. (2003) Synergistic effects of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor and chondroitinase ABC on retinal fiber
sprouting after denervation of the superior colliculus in adult rats. J.
Neurosci., 23, 7034–7044.
Weidner, N., Ner, A., Salimi, N. & Tuszynski, M.H. (2001) Spontaneous
corticospinal axonal plasticity and functional recovery after adult central
nervous system injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 3513–3518.
Yamaguchi, Y. (2000) Lecticans: organizers of the brain extracellular matrix.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 57, 276–289.
Yick, L.W., So, K.F., Cheung, P.T. & Wu, W.T. (2004) Lithium chloride
reinforces the regeneration-promoting effect of chondroitinase ABC on
rubrospinal neurons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma, 21, 932–943.
Yip, P.K., Wong, L.F., Sears, T.A., Yanez-Munoz, R.J. & McMahon, S.B.
(2010) Cortical overexpression of neuronal calcium sensor-1 induces func-
tional plasticity in spinal cord following unilateral pyramidal tract injury in
rat. PLoS Biol., 8, e1000399.
Z’Graggen, W.J., Metz, G.A., Kartje, G.L., Thallmair, M. & Schwab, M.E.
(1998) Functional recovery and enhanced corticofugal plasticity after uni-
lateral pyramidal tract lesion and blockade of myelin-associated neurite
growth inhibitors in adult rats. J. Neurosci., 18, 4744–4757.
Z’Graggen, W.J., Fouad, K., Raineteau, O., Metz, G.A., Schwab, M.E. & Kar-
tje, G.L. (2000) Compensatory sprouting and impulse rerouting after unilat-
eral pyramidal tract lesion in neonatal rats. J. Neurosci., 20, 6561–6569.
Zhao, R.R., Muir, E.M., Alves, J.N., Rickman, H., Allan, A.Y., Kwok, J.C.,
Roet, K.C., Verhaagen, J., Schneider, B.L., Bensadoun, J.C., Ahmed, S.
G., Yanez-Munoz, R.J., Keynes, R.J., Fawcett, J.W. & Rogers, J.H.
(2011) Lentiviral vectors express chondroitinase ABC in cortical projec-
tions and promote sprouting of injured corticospinal axons. J. Neurosci.
Methods, 201, 228–238.
Zhou, L. & Shine, H.D. (2003) Neurotrophic factors expressed in both cortex
and spinal cord induce axonal plasticity after spinal cord injury. J. Neuro-
sci. Res., 74, 221–226.
Zhou, L., Baumgartner, B.J., Hill-Felberg, S.J., McGowen, L.R. & Shine, H.
D. (2003) Neurotrophin-3 expressed in situ induces axonal plasticity in the
adult injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci., 23, 1424–1431.
 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 3665–3678
3678 M. L. Starkey et al.
