Delivery of therapeutic genes to injured areas consti-
tutes a potential approach to stimulating neuroregeneration.
Various differentiated, stem, and induced pluripotent stem
and progenitor cells are used for this method [1, 4, 13].
Cord blood cells have significant potential, because of their
low immunogenicity, availability, simplicity and safety of
use, and ability to survive prolonged storage. These cells
have been subjected to intensive study as a source of stem
and progenitor cells for transplantation in cerebral traumas
and ischemia, as well as for the treatment of neurodegener-
ative diseases [12, 15]. Studies of the efficacy of delivering
neurotrophic factor genes using cell carriers have only start-
ed recently. We selected a combination of the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast
growth factor (FGF2) for stimulation of the post-traumatic
regeneration of the spinal cord. Both molecular determi-
nants are members of the neurotrophic factors family, while
VEGF promotes neovascularization. The effects of this
combination of genes on neuroregeneration processes have
not been studied. We therefore constructed, for the first
Neuroscience and Behavioral Physiology, Vol. 43, No. 5, June, 2013
Effects of Transplantation of Human Cord Blood Mononuclear
Cells Expressing the Recombinant VEGF and FGF2 Genes 
into Spinal Cord Traumatic Injury Sites in Rats
G. F. Shaimardanova,1 Ya. O. Mukhamedshina,2
A. A. Rizvanov,3,4,5 I. I. Salafutdinov,4,5
and Yu. A. Chelyshev2
UDC 616.832-001-089.843:611.018.5:599.323.4
0097-0549/13/4305-0597 ©2013 Springer Science+Business Media New York
597
Translated from Morfologiya, Vol. 142, No. 4, pp. 31–36, July–August, 2012. Original article submitted
February 14, 2011. Revised version received March 12, 2012.
A model of dosed TVIII spinal cord contusion trauma in rats was used to study the effects of immediate
single-dose transplantation of human cord blood mononuclear cells transformed with the recombinant
genes for neurotrophic factors – vascular endothelia growth factor (VEGF) and fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2) – into the injury zone. A further group of animals, in the same conditions, received the same cells
transfected with plasmid pEGFP-N2. EGFP-labeled cells were detected in the white matter for 21 days
after transplantation at distances of at least 10 mm in the rostral and caudal directions from the adminis-
tration point. By 30 days after transplantation with cells transfected with plasmid pBud-VEGF-FGF2, the
area of intact gray matter 3 mm from the trauma epicenter increased by more than 60%. By this time,
the outer areas of the white matter in animals of this group, 1.5 cm from the trauma epicenter, showed an
average 30% increase in the number of perivascular cells expressing platelet-derived growth factor β
receptors (PDGFβR). Addition of therapeutic genes VEGF an FGF2 to the trauma injury zone and their
expression in carrier cells stimulated vascularization and post-traumatic regeneration of the spinal cord.
Keywords: spinal cord, regeneration, cord blood cells, VEGF, FGF2.
1 Laboratory for the Molecular Basis of Pathogenesis (Director:
Professor V. M. Chernov), Kazan Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, a/ya 30, 420111
Kazan; e-mail: gulnara_kzn@rambler.ru.
2 Department of Histology, Cytology, and Embryology (Director:
Professor Yu. A. Chelyshev), Kazan State Medical University,
Kazan; e-mail: Yanakazmedhist1@rambler.ru,
chelyshev-kzn@yandex.ru.
3 Central Research Laboratory (Director: S. R. Abdulkhanov),
Kazan State Medical University, Kazan; 
e-mail: rizvanov@gmail.com.
4 Department of Genetics (Director: Professor 
B. I. Barabanshchikov), Kazan (Volga) Federal University,
Kazan; e-mail: sal.ilnur@gmail.com.
5 Republican Clinical Hospital, Ministry of Health of the
Republic of Tatarstan, Kazan.
Shaimardanova, Mukhamedshina, Rizvanov, et al.598
Fig. 2. Intense specific staining for EGFP in human cord blood mononuclear cells transfected into the spinal cord injury site in the posterior fasciculi at the
boundary with the gray matter (a) and local staining in the posterior corticospinal tract and along the posterior medical sulcus (b). a) 7 days; b) 14 days after
trauma. Dotted lines show boundaries between gray and white matter; arrows how the anterior median cleft. Magnification ×250.
Fig. 4. Expression of PDGFβR in zone 3 of the white matter of the rat spinal
cord 1.5 cm from the trauma epicenter in the rostral direction 14 days after
transplantation of human cord blood cells transfected with plasmid pBud-
EGFP. Immunocytochemical reaction; magnification ×250.
Fig. 1. Fragment of rat spinal cord 3 mm from the epicenter 30 days
after transplantation of human cord blood mononuclear cells trans-
fected with plasmid pBud-EGFP into the contusional injury area at
the TVIII level. The dotted line shows the boundary between the cen-
tral pathological cavity and the zone of relatively intact white matter
able to recover. Magnification ×40.
time, a double-cassette plasmid, pBud-VEGF-FGF2, which
simultaneously expresses both genes [3]. This was used to
transfect human cord blood mononuclear cells [12]. The
aim of the present work was to use a model of dosed contu-
sion trauma to the rat spinal cord to study the effects of
immediate single deliveries of human cord blood mononu-
clear cells genetically modified with the plasmid vector
expressing two recombinant human neurotrophic factor
genes, VEGF and FGF2, to the injury site.
Materials and Methods
Experiments were performed on 25 white laboratory
rats, females and males, weighing 200–250 g. Laboratory
animals were kept and used in compliance with the regula-
tions applying at the Kazan State Medical University and
approved by the Ethics Committee. Animals were kept in
standard conditions with free access to water and feed. Rats
were anesthetized by i.p. injection of chloral hydrate
(Sigma, USA) (80 mg/ml, 0.4 ml/100 g). Animals under-
went laminectomy at the level of TVIII. Dosed contusion
trauma to the spinal cord was applied as described previ-
ously [2]. Collection of human cord blood and extraction of
the mononuclear cell fraction were performed as described
previously [12]. Extracted cells were transfected by electro-
poration [12] with plasmids pBud-VEGF-FGF2 [3] for ani-
mals of group 1 (n = 7). Immediately after imposition of
trauma, transfected cells (106 cells in 5 μl of DPBS (phos-
phate-buffered saline, sterile, lacking Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions,
BioloT, Russia)) were injected at two points 1 mm rostral
and caudal to the trauma epicenter and 0.5 mm lateral to
the midline using a Hamilton syringe (Sigma, USA). In the
same conditions, animals of group 2 (n = 18) received
the same quantity of analogous cells transfected with plas-
mid pBud-EGFP-N2 (Clontech, USA), carrying the gene
for enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP). During the
seven days after surgery, all animals received i.m. gentam-
icin (5 mg/kg) once daily. Animals of group 1 at 30 days
and animals of group 2 at 2, 4, 7, 14, 21, and 30 days after
trauma were anesthetized and subjected to transcardiac per-
fusion of 4% paraformaldehyde solution (4°C). Fragments
of spinal cord of length 5 cm were collected along with ver-
tebrae. After 12 h of fixation, spinal cord was collected and
divided into five equal parts.
The survival and migratory potential of cells transfect-
ed with plasmid pBud-EGFP-N2 were studied in cryostat
Effects of Transplantation of Human Cord Blood Mononuclear Cells 599
Fig. 5. Numbers of PDGFβR+ cells in different zones of the white matter
30 days after surgery. White columns show animals of group 1 (pBud-
VEGF-FGF2); dark columns show animals of group 2 (pBud-EGFP-N2).
The abscissa shows morphometric zones; the ordinate shows cell numbers.
Vertical bars show mean square deviations; differences between control
and experimental values significant at p < 0.05.
Fig. 3. Area of preserved gray (a) and white (b) matter on transverse sections of rat spinal cord at the level of TVIII 30 days after transplantation of human
cord blood cells transfected with plasmid pEGFP-N2 (dotted line) and plasmid pBud-VEGF-FGF2 (continuous line) into the contusion injury zone.
Abscissas show distance from the trauma epicenter – from 0 in the caudal (at left) and rostral directions (at right) (mm); ordinates show areas (mm2).
Significant differences: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01.
transverse spinal cord sections. Semithin sections stained
with methylene blue prepared from specimens collected 30
days after surgery and embedded in Epon-Araldite were
used for measurement of the areas of intact gray and white
matter at distances of 3 and 5 mm from the trauma epicen-
ter in the rostral and caudal directions.
Perivascular cell detection was performed on cryostat
transverse sections of the spinal cord at a distance of 1.5 cm
from the trauma epicenter by an indirect immunoperoxidase
method using antibodies to platelet growth factor β receptors
(PDGFβR) (Sigma, USA) at a dilution of 1:100. PDGFβR+
cells were counted in digital images in four defined zones of
the white matter: 1 – the ventromedial part of the anterior
fasciculus, adjacent to the median fissure on the right side; 2
– the same but on the left side; 3 – the lateral part of the lat-
eral fasciculus in the frontal plane passing through the cen-
tral canal, right side; 4 – the same but on the left side [1].
Specimens were examined and digital images were obtained
using an Axio Image A1 microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany).
Morphometric results were processed using Student’s t test.
Results
In the area of spinal cord contusions, during the early
post-trauma period (day 7), the relatively preserved white
matter showed edema, degeneration of nerve fibers rostral and
caudal to the trauma epicenter, and destructive changes to
their myelin sheaths. The greatest level of damage affected the
gray matter, where chromatolysis and neuron death were seen.
In animals given plasmid pBud-EGFP-N2, by day 30, the
boundaries between the gray and white matter were not visi-
ble in the trauma area or at distances of 3 and 5 mm in the cau-
dal and rostral directions. Cross sections showed a central
zone of completely disintegrated tissue, apparent as an exten-
sive cavity containing fragments of degenerated cells (Fig. 1).
The size of this cavity decreased with increasing distance
from the trauma epicenter: at a distance of 3 mm, it was two
thirds and at 5 mm it was one half of the area of the section.
At the periphery of the sections, the structure of the white mat-
ter was retained and signs of damage were less marked. At this
location there was an abundance of microcavities separated by
layers of connective tissue, along with signs of astrogliosis.
Clear differences in the structure of the trauma epicen-
ter in animals given plasmids pBud-VEGF-FGF2 (group 1)
and rats of group 2 were not seen.
The spinal cord of animals of group 2, given cord blood
mononuclear cells transfected with plasmid pEGFP-N2,
showed specific staining at distances of up to 10 mm in the
rostral or caudal directions from the injection point. This
staining was most intense in the early periods after trauma
and administration of cells (days 2–6) and was clearly present
at later periods (days 14–21) (Fig. 2), gradually decreasing to
day 30. EGFP-labeled cells were present in surviving gray
and white matter tissue and entered the pathological cavity.
While two days after transplantation, fluorescent cells were
distributed more uniformly and mainly in the white matter,
they formed accumulations with intense fluorescence by six
days both in the ventral parts of the posterior fasciculi and,
particularly, in the adjacent dorsal part of the gray matter (see
Fig. 2, a). By day 7, the area with characteristic staining for
EGFP occupied a larger volume and staining intensity
increased, possibly resulting from increased EGFP expres-
sion in transplanted cells or increases in the number of such
cells due to active proliferation. By day 14, the area contain-
ing EGFP+ cells decreased significantly. By this time, specif-
ic EGFP fluorescence was detected in compact groups of
cells, mainly in the ventral part of the posterior fasciculi at the
boundary with the gray matter (see Fig. 2, b).
By day 30 after transplantation of cells transfected with
plasmid pBud-VEGF-FGF2 (group 1), the area of surviving
gray matter increased by 66% 3 mm in the rostral direction
from the trauma epicenter and by 61% in the caudal direc-
tion (Fig. 3, a). Comparison of groups 1 (pBud-VEGF-
FGF2) and 2 (pBud-EGFP-N2) showed that differences in
the areas of surviving gray matter 5 mm from the epicenter
were less marked, though, as at 3 mm from the epicenter,
values were 40% greater in the rostral direction and 31%
greater in the caudal direction (p < 0.05) (see Fig. 3, a).
A decrease in the area of tissue destruction on trans-
plantation of cells transfected with plasmid pBud-VEGF-
FGF2 was also seen in the white matter (see Fig. 3, b). By
experimental day 30, 3 mm in the rostral and caudal direc-
tions from the trauma epicenter, the areas of surviving white
matter in animals of group 1 were 56% and 63% greater than
those in the same directions in group 2. At 5 mm in the ros-
tral and caudal directions from the trauma epicenter, the areas
of surviving white matter in animals of group 1 increased by
45% and 43%, respectively (p < 0.05) (see Fig. 3, b). Morpho-
metric results provided evidence that the supporting influ-
ence on gray and white matter survival resulting from deliv-
ery of therapeutic genes dropped off with increasing distance
from the trauma epicenter and cell administration points.
Precipitate of the end product of the immunohisto-
chemical reaction with anti-PDGFβR antibodies was seen
predominantly in the white matter in cells associated with
blood vessels. The long PDGFβR-immunopositive pro-
cesses of these perivascular cells were oriented along blood
vessels passing in the radial direction (Fig. 4). The largest
numbers of PDGFβR+-cells were seen in the outer zones of
the white matter. No differences were seen in the distribu-
tion pattern or immunohistochemical reaction precipitate
intensity in specimens obtained from animals of groups 1
(pBud-VEGF-FGF2) and 2 (pBud-EGFP-N2). In animals
of group 1, the number of perivascular cells expressing
PDGFβR in the outer zones of the white matter 1.5 cm
from the trauma epicenter increased by an average of 30%
(Fig. 5).
Discussion
The supporting influence of transplanted cells and the
regeneration stimulators delivered by them on recovery of lost
Shaimardanova, Mukhamedshina, Rizvanov, et al.600
spinal cord functions depend to a significant extent on the sur-
vival and duration of these cells in the recipient tissue, as well
as on their migratory potential. In this regard, our data are con-
sistent with results reported elsewhere [5, 14], in which genet-
ically modified stem mesenchymal cells transplanted into the
intact rat spinal cord, in the presence of adequate immuno-
suppressive therapy, not only survived for at least three weeks,
but also expressed the transgene. Increases in specific staining
for EGFP in the early post-transplantation period in the spinal
cord trauma zone in rats, after delivery by human cord blood
cells, may result from the proliferation of these cells and/or
increases in their expression of the transgene.
In our experimental conditions, the prolonged expres-
sion of EGFP given, without immunosuppression, at the
moment of trauma rather than after the peak of the cytostatic
actions of proinflammatory cytokines and cellular immune
responses led to expression not only of the high survival abil-
ity of the transplanted cells, but also of the potential for main-
taining the expression of therapeutic genes.
It can be suggested that transfection of cells with neu-
rotrophic factor genes in the combination used here, VEGF
and FGF2, increases the number of viable cells and pro-
longs their persistence at the trauma site. This possibility
has been demonstrated for neural stem cells transfected
with the VEGF gene when transplanted into spinal cord
contusion trauma zones [9].
The importance of the migratory potential of human
cord blood cells after transplantation into spinal cord trau-
ma sites identified here should be noted. The migratory
potential of the cord blood mononuclear cells studied here
in the spinal cord contusion zone was greater than or at the
level of typical hematopoietic and neural stem cells in anal-
ogous experiments [7, 10].
PDGF-B binds to PDGFβR receptors, stimulating the
differentiation of pericytes from PDGFβR-expressing pre-
cursors, resulting in a supportive influence on the vascular-
ization process [6, 8]. Impairments to this are demonstrated
in PDGF-B and PDGFβR defects [11]. The increase in the
number of PDGFβR+ cells at 30 days seen in the present
experiments reflects an increase in vascularization of the
white matter around the traumatic spinal cord injury. This
effect appears to result from the action of VEGF produced
by the transplanted cord blood cells.
Our results provide evidence that delivery of the ther-
apeutic VEGF and FGF2 genes using human cord blood
mononuclear cells leads to decreases in the areas of destruc-
tion of the gray and white matter, stimulates vascularization
of brain tissue, and supports the post-traumatic regeneration
of brain tissue.
This study was supported by a State Contract from the
Federal Targeted Program of the Russian Federation
Ministry of Education and Sciences, No. 16.512.112101.
REFERENCES
1. S. V. Lebedev, A. V. Karasev, V. P. Chikhonin, et al., “Studies of the
efficacy of human neural stem cell transplantation into rats with
spinal cord trauma: use of functioning loading tests and the BBB
method,” Byull. Eksperim. Biol., 149, No. 3, 355–360 (2010).
2. S. V. Lebedev, S. V. Timofeev, A. V. Zharkov, et al., “Loading tests
and the BBB method in assessment of motor impairments after con-
tusional trauma to the spinal cord,” Byull. Eksperim. Biol., 145,
No. 10, 471–476 (2008).
3. I. I. Salafutdinov, A. K. Shafigullina, M. E. Yalvach, et al., “Effects
of once-off expression of different isoforms of vascular endothelial
growth factor VEGF and basic fibroblast growth factor FGF2 on the
proliferation of human umbilical vein blood endothelial cells
HUVEC,” Klet. Transpl. Tkan. Inzh., 5, No. 2, 62–67 (2010).
4. Yu. A. Chelyshev and I. V. Viktorov, “Cellular techniques for remy-
elination in spinal cord trauma,” Nevrol. Vestn. Bekhtereva, No. 1,
49–55 (2009).
5. L. Bai, D. P. Lennon, V. Eaton, et al., “Human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells induce Th-2-polarized immune response
and promote endogenous repair in animal models of multiple scle-
rosis,” Glia, 57, No. 11, 1192–1203 (2009).
6. C. Betsholtz, P. Lindblom, and H. Gerhardt, “Role of pericytes in
vascular morphogenesis,” EXS, 94, 115–125 (2005).
7. S. S. Han, Y. Liu, C. Tyler-Polsz, et al., “Transplantation of glial-
restricted precursor cells into the adult spinal cord: survival, glial-
specific differentiation, and preferential migration in white matter,”
Glia, 45, 1–16 (2004).
8. M. Hellstrom, H. Gerhardt, M. Kalen, et al., “Lack of pericytes leads
to endothelial hyperplasia and abnormal vascular morphogenesis,”
J. Cell Biol., 153, 543–553 (2001).
9. J. H. Lin, W. A. Pennant, H. M. Lee, et al., “Neural stem cells mod-
ified by a hypoxia-inducible VEGF gene expression system improve
cell viability under hypoxic conditions and spinal cord injury,”
Spine, 36, No. 11, 857–864 (2011).
10. A. R. Khalatbary and T. Tiraihi, “Localization of bone marrow stro-
mal cells in injured spinal cord treated by intravenous route depends
on the hemorrhagic lesions in traumatized spinal tissue,” Neurol.
Res., 29, No. 1, 21–26 (2007).
11. P. Lindahl, B. Johansson, P. Leveen, and C. Betsholtz, “Pericyte loss
and microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B deficient mice,” Science,
277, 242–245 (1997).
12. A. A. Rizvanov, A. P. Kiyasov, I. M. Gaziziov, et al., “Human umbil-
ical cord blood cells transfected with VEGF and L(1)CAM do not
differentiate into neurons but transform into vascular endothelial
cells and secrete neurotrophic factors to support neurogenesis – a
novel approach in stem cell therapy,” Neurochem. Int., 53, No. 6–8,
389–394 (2008).
13. M. Ronaghi, S. Erceg, V. Moreno-Manzano, and M. Stojkovic,
“Challenges of stem cell therapy for spinal cord injury: human
embryonic stem cells, endogenous stem cells, or induced pluripotent
stem cells?” Stem Cells, 28, No. 1, 93–99 (2010).
14. M. W. Ronsyn, Z. N. Berneman, V. F. Van Tendeloo, et al., “Can cell
therapy heal a spinal cord injury?” Spinal Cord, 46, No. 8, 532–539
(2008).
15. Z. M. Zhao, H. J. Li, S. H. Lu, et al., “Intraspinal transplantation of
CD34+ human umbilical cord blood cells after spinal cord hemisec-
tion injury improves functional recovery in adult rats,” Cell
Transplant., 13, No. 2, 113–122 (2004).
Effects of Transplantation of Human Cord Blood Mononuclear Cells 601
