Biochem. J. (2013) 451, 353–364 (Printed in Great Britain) doi:10.1042/BJ20121807 353
REVIEW ARTICLE
Spinal cord regeneration: where fish, frogs and salamanders lead the way,
can we follow?
Juan Felipe DIAZ QUIROZ and Karen ECHEVERRI1
University of Minnesota, Stem Cell Institute, Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, 2001 6th St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, U.S.A.
Major trauma to the mammalian spinal cord often results
in irreversible loss of function, i.e. paralysis, and current
therapies ranging from drugs, implantations of stem cells and/or
biomaterials, and electrically stimulated nerve regrowth, have
so far offered very limited success in improving quality-of-life.
However, in marked contrast with this basic shortcoming of ours,
certain vertebrate species, including fish and salamanders, display
the amazing ability to faithfully regenerate various complex body
structures after injury or ablation, restoring full functionality, even
in the case of the spinal cord. Despite the inherently strong and
obvious translational potential for improving treatment strategies
for human patients, our in-depth molecular-level understanding
of these decidedly more advanced repair systems remains in its
infancy. In the present review, we will discuss the current state of
this field, focusing on recent progress in such molecular analyses
using various regenerative species, and how these so far relate to
the mammalian situation.
Key words: axon, glial scar, regeneration, spinal cord.
NATURALLY OCCURRING SPINAL CORD REGENERATION
The wondrous ability of certain fortunate animals to fully
regenerate entire appendages following major injuries has
fascinated their human observers as far back as Aristotle’s
time [1]. By 1714, the French naturalist Réaumur published
the first experimental evidence showing that crayfish can
replace appendages after amputation [2]. Over the centuries,
the regeneration models of choice have varied widely, with
different scientists favouring a wide array of species including
worms, lizards, lampreys and salamanders. This rich body
of work, primarily comprising detailed characterizations and
experimentation on the basis of classical developmental and
cytological approaches, has yielded a wealth of invaluable insights
into regenerative abilities throughout the animal kingdom [3]. In
this section, we will focus specifically on those model organisms
that have more recently proven particularly useful in driving the
now-emerging growth in molecular level analyses of spinal cord
regeneration, discussing new findings not only from vertebrates,
but also from invertebrate systems that, despite the absence of a
spinal cord, can offer useful lessons from their versions of axonal
regeneration (Table 1).
Zebrafish
In recent years, the zebrafish has grown in popularity as a model
system for studying regenerative processes due to its genetic
tractability and similarity to higher vertebrate architecture in many
organs and tissues [4]. Although the basic cytology of the zebrafish
spinal cord is relatively similar to that of a mammalian spinal cord,
their respective cellular responses to injury appear quite different,
resulting in functional injury repair only in the zebrafish [4,5].
Previous work has shown that, in response to spinal cord
injury, glial cells in the adult zebrafish are capable of amplifying
and migrating to repair the lesion [5,6]. Work from the Currie
laboratory has shown that the glial cells adjacent to the injury
initially proliferate and migrate 3–5 days post-injury. Cells
migrating into the lesion site are found to down-regulate GFAP
(glial fibrillary acidic protein), up-regulate nestin and undergo a
significant morphological change to become bipolar [6]. These
newly born glial cells then undergo a distinct differentiation
process that includes up-regulation of GFAP, maintenance of
nestin expression and further elongation to span the width of
the lesion site along the AP (anterior–posterior) axis, effectively
creating a ‘glial bridge’ upon which axons can grow across the
lesion site. Formation of the glial bridge is an FGF (fibroblast
growth factor)-dependent process and has been shown to be
essential for locomotive recovery in the zebrafish [6]. However,
it remains unclear whether inhibition of FGF signalling in the
zebrafish results in a mammalian-like glial scar formation, or
merely inhibits proliferation and migration of the glial cells.
This response of the glial cells in the regenerative context
of the zebrafish is markedly different to that observed for
the corresponding cells in the mammalian context, as further
described below. Interestingly, exposure of mammalian astrocytes
to FGF2 induces a bipolar morphology similar to that seen in vivo
in zebrafish glial cells during formation of the glial bridge. This
does not, however, result in up-regulation of nestin or other
progenitor cell markers, suggesting that other FGFs or co-factors
may be required for this [6]. While the same study also suggested
that functional recovery is driven by this axonogenesis across
the glial bridge from a mixture of newly formed and mature
neurons, other reports have pointed to the presence of inherent
cell populations, such as olig2-positive ependymal radial glial
Abbreviations used: BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; CNS, central nervous system; CSPG, chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycan; CST, cortico-spinal track; DLK, dual leucine zipper kinase; DRG, dorsal root ganglion (ganglia); E, embryonic day; ECM, extracellular
matrix; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; GFP, green fluorescent protein; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal
kinase; MAG, myelin-associated glycoprotein; MAP, microtubule-associated protein; NgR, Nogo receptor; Nogo, neurite outgrowth inhibitor; OMgp,
oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein; OPC, oligodendrocyte precursor cell; PNS, peripheral nervous system; TH1, tyrosine hydroxylase 1.
1 To whom correspondence should be addressed (email echev020@umn.edu).
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
B
io
ch
em
ic
al
 J
ou
rn
al
   
 w
w
w
.b
io
ch
em
j.o
rg
354 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
Table 1 Overview of regeneration in different species
n.a., not applicable.
Process Worms Fish Frogs Axolotls and newts Mammals
Glial response n.a. Proliferation Proliferation Proliferation Proliferation
Migration Migration Migration Migration
Bridge formation New tube formation [19,29] New tube formation Up-regulation of scar proteins
[4–7] [43,46,51,54,56,61,64,80] [8–11,62,63,65–67,71]
Glial scar n.a. No [4–6] Not in larvae, unknown in No [41,64] Yes [42,73–75,82]
non-regenerative adult [15,16]
Axon degeneration Yes [139] Some [14] In adults [16] Unknown Yes [122–129]
Axon regrowth Yes Yes Yes, in larvae, not in adults Yes [38–41,44,50] No (limited regeneration can be promoted)
[137–140] [12–14] [15,16,27,30] [66,69,71,76–78,115,117–121,130,144,146]
Functional recovery Yes Partial Yes, in larvae, not in adults Yes [38,39,41] No (limited recovery can be promoted)
[135,137] [12–14] [15,29,30] [69,71,72,76–78,130,153,154]
cells, that give rise to new motor neurons in a Notch-regulated
process [7]. Interestingly, in mammals, those neural progenitor
cells are also present in the adult mammalian spinal cord [8–
10]. These cells express similar markers as found in glial cells in
fish, such as Pax6 and Pax7; however, after injury to the spinal
cord Notch1 has been found to be up-regulated in vivo [11].
In vitro experiments have shown that overexpression of Notch
in these progenitor cells prevents differentiation, suggesting that
in the in vivo scenario this up-regulation of Notch prevents the
formation of new neurons in response to injury [11]. However,
given the complexity of the response needed to prevent scarring
and induce new neurogenesis, it seems unlikely that modulation
of the Notch pathways alone would enhance axonal regeneration
in mammals.
Beyond the neuronal cell lineage or provenance issue, however,
it is clear that, in the adult zebrafish spinal cord, axonal
regeneration is not always perfect, leading to a variable recovery
of swimming ability, which in turn correlates with the number of
supraspinal neurons that have successfully grown beyond the
lesion site [12]. In fact, exact accuracy in ‘re-wiring’ all of
the lost connections may not be as important as creating
new alternative solutions [13]. Recent work examining the
regeneration of dopaminergic and serotonergic axons has also
shown that TH1 (tyrosine hydroxylase 1)-positive and 5-HT (5-
hydroxytryptamine)-positive innervation are significantly altered
after regeneration, suggesting that there is considerable plasticity
in the spinal network in the zebrafish [14]. Directly after injury,
although an increase in TH1-positive cells is seen on the rostral
side of the lesion, many of these cells are lost from the caudal
side, and most TH1-positive axons fail to re-innervate caudally to
the original lesion even after extended periods post-regeneration
[14]. A similar phenomenon is seen for 5-HT-positive neurons,
despite the fact that full swimming ability is recovered in these
animals, thus suggesting that it is indeed not necessary to re-
establish the original neuronal connections to achieve functional
recovery.
These findings illustrate how the zebrafish system is indeed
providing valuable insights into the basic cellular processes
and molecular cues responsible for spinal cord regeneration
in this organism. As such, this promises strong potential for
also addressing the many open questions that remain, especially
regarding the molecular signals needed to instruct glial cells to
transition from the proliferative state and to differentiate into new
neurons at the right time and right locations.
Anurans: tailless amphibians
Spinal cord regeneration in the context of tail regeneration
Tailless amphibians, such as frogs, are of particular interest in
the present context since these organisms live through multiple
developmental life stages, only some of which carry regenerative
capacities [15,16]. Indeed, although most of the larval stages
have the ability to regenerate limbs and tails, including a fully
innervated spinal cord, metamorphosis to later stages typically
results in a complete loss of these regenerative abilities. As
such, these models offer the unique possibility of conducting
comparative studies between regenerative and non-regenerative
repair processes within the same organism, including attempts to
promote regeneration at the larval refractory stages.
Among these organisms, Xenopus laevis displays, in addition to
its other well-documented experimental advantages, a refractory
period during larval development that has also been used as a
system for studying regeneration. One of the first descriptions of
frog larval tail regeneration was that of Harrison in 1898 [17],
where he recorded the regeneration of the larval tail after various
types of amputations and wounding, noting that “the regenerated
appendage never becomes exactly like the original”. Interestingly,
Harrison already posed key questions about the effect of the
position of ‘the regenerating centre’ with regard to the whole
stump and went on to carry out some of the first transplantation
studies in Xenopus embryos [17], which ultimately led to some of
the first successful tissue culture experiments [18]. Elegant studies
using transplantation of specific structures or tissue regions, such
as somites or neural folds, from GFP (green fluorescent protein)-
positive embryos into wild-type embryos have been used to trace
the lineage of cells in the regenerate. These studies have revealed
that the spinal cord and notochord arise from the corresponding
mature cells in the stump, whereas new muscle is formed from
satellite cells that migrate from the mature muscle adjacent to the
injury site [19].
Meanwhile, other Xenopus-driven studies have also begun to
probe the underlying molecular pathways, showing that Wnt
and FGF signalling are required downstream of BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) signalling for faithful regeneration to
occur, thereby revealing important similarities with zebrafish
spinal cord regeneration [20–22]. Modulation of the Notch
pathway has also shown its requirement for regeneration of the
Xenopus spinal cord, although the same approach failed to detect
the same requirement in muscle regeneration [23,24].
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
Spinal cord regeneration 355
Extensive electrophysiology studies, first carried out in
Xenopus and salamanders, have suggested a role for endogenous
ion currents in regeneration. Modulation of external electrical
fields has been shown to inhibit limb regeneration in urodeles
[25,26], although the molecular mechanism underlying this
phenomenon remains unclear. Work from the Levin laboratory has
begun to shed light on the role of ions in stimulating regeneration
in Xenopus. This group identified the V-ATPase H+ pump as
being required for regeneration to occur, revealing through further
studies not only the requirement for an influx of H+ ions to induce
regeneration, but also that such an influx on its own is sufficient to
stimulate regeneration during the refractory period [27]. Although
this influx of ions was suggested to control membrane potential
and cell proliferation, thus potentially representing an early-stage
regulator of gene expression, the full extent of this signalling
cascade remains unknown. Interestingly, further studies from this
group have also identified a role for transient Na+ currents in
promoting spinal cord regeneration, even after a non-regenerative
wound epithelium has formed [28]. These data show that Nav1.2
channels lie upstream of Notch and msx1 (Msh homeobox 1)
induction in the early blastema, and that the V-ATPase H+ pump
lies upstream of Nav1.2 channels themselves. Together, these two
studies offer exciting new insights into the molecular physiology
of regeneration and suggest new avenues for attempting to
promote spinal cord regeneration using pharmacological means.
Although the exact role of ion channels in the early stages of the
regenerative response remains unclear, the suggestion that this
may involve regulating the differentiation state of cells, potentially
driving some towards more stem-cell-like states, clearly warrants
further investigation.
Of note in this context, Xenopus have recently been shown to
harbour Sox2-positive cells, a putative neural stem cell population
within the spinal cord, which proliferates and migrates in response
to injury to the spinal cord alone and after transection of the
tail [29]. Down-regulation of Sox2 expression correlates with
the loss of regenerative capacity as the Xenopus undergoes
metamorphosis. These findings also suggest that, in the context
of spinal cord transections, these cells migrate and form a
substrate for supporting axonal regeneration [30], which is
crucially missing in mammals. Although neural stem cells exist
in mammals and can proliferate in response to injury [8–10], their
response to injury does not promote a regeneration-competent
environment [31].
It is worth noting that these important advances in the
regeneration field have been enabled through elegant exploitations
of the Xenopus laevis system’s key strengths and despite its
persistent limitations from the lack of genomic sequences and
difficulties in producing transgenic lines [32]. Xenopus tropicalis,
whose simpler diploid genome has now been sequenced, has
recently been shown to display similar regenerative capacities
as X. laevis, thus potentially offering a more genetically
tractable anurans system [33]. Recent transcriptome analysis
of different stages of the regenerative process have identified
dynamic regulation of interesting subsets of genes involved in
the inflammatory response, intracellular metabolism and energy
regulation, offering compelling new insights into the regulation
of different phases of the regenerative response [33].
Caudata: tailed amphibians
Spinal cord regeneration after injury
Tailed amphibians, such as newts and salamanders, have long been
considered the champions of regeneration, having the remarkable
ability to regenerate a wide range of body parts throughout life
[34,35]. Although the Mexican ‘axolotl’ salamander naturally
remains aquatic and retains juvenile characteristics throughout
life, when forced to become terrestrial like newts, it still maintains
its ability to regenerate [36,37]. In recent years, spurred on by a
surge of interest in regenerative medicine, these model systems
have come to the fore, favoured for this extensive regenerative
capacity, as well as exquisite cytology and key advances in
molecular and transgenic tools.
To date, much of the work carried out on spinal cord
regeneration in salamanders has been in the context of tail
regeneration following amputation, although many older studies
have also documented their regenerative repair of more discrete
spinal cord lesions. As early as 1965, Butler and Ward first
described the regeneration and functional recovery after a lesion
in the spinal cord of the newt [38,39]. Their work described a
process in which the two ends of the spinal cord are sealed over
and migrate towards one another and, over time, axons then regrow
through the lesion site [38]. These early findings are remarkably
similar to the process that has now been described to also occur
in zebrafish, as discussed above. Retrograde labelling of axons
has shown a strong correlation between co-ordinated swimming
and regrowth of the descending supraspinal axons [40]. More
recent work in newts has shown that putative meningeal and glial
cells create a regeneration-permissive environment after spinal
cord injury [41]. Interestingly the meningeal fibroblasts and glial
cells migrate into the injury site along with endothelial cells and
create a substrate on which the axons can regrow. In their model,
although sensory neurons do not appear to regenerate, the animals
appear to regain full motor control [41]. The authors suggest that,
in the newt, the meningeal cells, glial cells and neuronal axons all
move as a co-ordinated unit to fill the injury gap. This would be in
stark opposition to what is observed following mammalian spinal
cord injury, where meningeal fibroblasts and astrocytes together
form a glial scar that actually inhibits axonal regrowth through
the lesion site [42].
Spinal cord regeneration after tail amputation
Beyond these observations from discrete lesions, the ability of the
salamander spinal cord and surrounding tail to fully regenerate
following a full amputation has also been thoroughly documented
in various species over the years [38,39,43–47]. Early papers
already established the necessity of the spinal cord for tail
regeneration to proceed successfully. Work from Nordlander
and Singer already postulated, on the basis of ultrastructural
observations, that descending axons regenerate by moving along
channels present in regenerating ependymal glial cells [43,44].
Although many of the early studies implied mechanisms on the
basis of structural observation, many of these observations have
proven to be very accurate and now provide the foundations for
more modern molecular experiments. Early in the field, work from
the Bryant laboratory carefully documented five distinct stages
of tail regeneration in the newt and showed that the length of
tail regenerated is proportional to the amount originally removed
[48,49].
Further work on understanding spinal cord regeneration has
also focused on the context of tail amputations. Cell lineage
tracing and transplantation studies have shown that, in both
Pleurodeles and Ambystoma, radial ependymal cells give rise to
the new glial cells in the regenerating spinal cord and can also
differentiate to produce new neurons, suggesting that these have
properties similar to neural stem cells [50–52]. This observation
has triggered the key question of whether these cells retain such
pluripotency throughout development from the embryonic state,
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
356 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
or whether this capacity is newly induced in response to injury.
Although previous work has shown that adult axolotl spinal cord
cells indeed retain expression of certain embryonic development
genes such as Pax7, Pax6 and Shh (sonic hedgehog), these are not
associated with stemness or pluripotency, but rather encode key
dorsoventral positioning cues, consistent with the maintenance
by most spinal cord cells of their dorsoventral identity during
regeneration [53,54]. Furthermore, Pax7 has been shown to be
down-regulated in the zone just proximal to the amputation plane
from where cells migrate out to form the regenerate, suggesting
that these cells may indeed revert to a more stem-cell-like state as
a result of injury [55]. In fact, there have been no published reports
to date of stem cell or pluripotency markers being expressed in the
adult axolotl spinal cord or surrounding tail tissues outside of the
injury context. Such a marker, namely FGF2, has been shown in
newts to be up-regulated in radial glial cells after injury in a zone
adjacent to the injury site [56]. The implied role in regulating pro-
liferation and differentiation of these cells [56,57] therefore adds
further support to the hypothesis that they are reverting to a more
neural stem-cell-like, or pluripotent, state as a response to injury.
Data from several groups have also confirmed the up-regulation
of not only FGF signalling molecules, but also Hox, Wnt and BMP
pathway components during the early stages of axolotl spinal cord
regeneration [55,56,58–60]. The consistency of these findings
with observations from zebrafish and Xenopus further supports
the emerging view that these signalling pathways represent
key conserved requirements underlying natural regenerative
capacities in many, if not most, of these organisms. As compelling
as this apparent convergence may be, it still leaves the exact
functional and mechanistic contributions of these genes and their
downstream effectors largely unknown, at least in newts and
axolotls. Early lineage tracing experiments in the axolotl using
overexpression of GFP driven by a glial-specific promoter has
shown that radial glial cells divide and migrate in response to tail
amputation, essentially acting as a neural stem cell population
as they give rise to new glial cells and neurons [61]. These
experiments also suggested that these cells are capable, at a low
frequency, of giving rise to cells of the mesodermal lineage.
This is also potentially supported by observations that cells
exit out of the regenerating spinal cord via the terminal vesicle
and enter surrounding tissues, although the exact fate of these
cells remains as yet undetermined [52,54,61]. The development
of axolotl transgenesis techniques combined with the ability to
transplant GFP-positive cells into wild-type animals has helped
shed more light on the behaviour of these putative axolotl neural
stem cells. Recent work from the Tanaka laboratory has shown
that non-clonal neural stem cells derived from transgenic GFP-
positive axolotls, when implanted back into wild-type animals,
were able to reconstitute both the CNS (central nervous system)
and the PNS (peripheral nervous system) following injury [52].
Although this suggested that such spinal cord neural stem cells
may be multipotent, similar experiments using clonally derived
cells failed to support this conclusion, as no contribution to DRG
(dorsal root ganglia) was detected [52]. Possible interpretations
suggest that in the cloning process multipotent stem cells may
have been selected against or, alternatively, that during the
initial process of dissecting the spinal cord tissue for non-clonal
experiments, the boundary cap cells (stem cells of the PNS located
at the interface between the CNS and PNS) were included in the
mix, but were selected against during the derivation of clonal
lines.
Again there are remarkable similarities observed between
species in their response to injury. In anurans, urodeles and
mammalian glial cells are seen to migrate and divide in response
to injury, and signalling pathways such as Notch, BMP and Wnts
are activated; however, the question remains as to why mammals
favour structural repair over functional regeneration. Although
much progress has been made in understanding where cells come
from and what their potential is during axolotl and newt spinal
cord regeneration, much work is yet to done to understand the
signals that drive cells to divide, migrate and differentiate at
the correct times and locations after injury, and this may help
us to promote functional regeneration compared with basic repair
in mammals.
MAMMALIAN RESPONSE TO SPINAL CORD INJURY
In stark contrast with the extensive regenerative capacities
discussed above, the mammalian CNS is effectively devoid of
such repair systems. In studying this basic shortcoming, many
pathways have been identified as inhibitors of mammalian CNS
axonal repair and regeneration. These can be broadly classified
as those that affect the severed axon itself compared with those
ascribed to neighbouring cells and structures, which render the
surrounding environment refractory to, or incapable of, supporting
axonal regeneration.
The glial scar: the good and the bad of the ugly
The glial scar is a major hallmark of injury in the mammalian CNS.
After injury to nerve cells, myelin sheaths insulating the axons
begin to degenerate, while astrocytes, oligodendrocyte precursors
and immune cells all migrate to the injury site (Figure 1). More
specifically, injury to the CNS initiates the process of reactive
gliosis [62,63], characterized by the presence of hypertrophic
proliferating astrocytes, also known as reactive astrocytes, which
up-regulate expression of intermediate filaments such as GFAP,
vimentin and nestin. Although glial cells in zebrafish and axolotls
are know to express similar markers after injury, they do not
appear to form an inhibitory glial scar [6,64]. The glial scar
is often referred to both as a physical and chemical barrier to
axon regeneration. Although the glial scar is often thought to
be mainly composed of reactive astrocytes, other cell types such
as microglia, macrophages and OPCs (oligodendrocyte precursor
cells) may also be involved in its formation. A recent study showed
that, after injury, the spatiotemporal reactivity of microglia mimics
that of astrocytic reactivity [65]. It has also been shown that,
even though reactive microglia and astrocytes can be seen as
early as 2 h after contusion injury in rats [65], astrocytes remain
in the borders of the injury, whereas macrophages invade the
core of it [42,62,66]. Interestingly, although microglia activation
may be beneficial for injury repair [67], macrophage invasion
increases axonal retraction after injury [68] and inhibits axonal
regeneration [69]. Moreover, in vivo and in vitro work from the
Silver laboratory has shown that precursor cells expressing nestin,
vimentin and NG2 (a marker for OPCs) prevent macrophage-
induced axonal retraction and promote axonal growth across the
inhibitory environment of the glial scar [66].
In recent studies, another cellular component of the glial scar
has been identified. The Frisén laboratory has identified a subset
of pericytes that give rise to stromal cells after injury to the spinal
cord. In the early phases post-injury, although astrocytes have long
been thought to be the main component of the glial scar [70], these
stromal cells are twice as abundant as reactive astrocytes in the
lesion site. Elegant genetic ablation studies have shown that these
stromal cells are essential in the early phases of reaction to injury,
to seal off the damaged tissue and to prevent further damage [70].
These results fit with the newly emerging view that the glial scar
has both a protective function and an inhibitory effect.
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
Spinal cord regeneration 357
Figure 1 Schematic diagram of spinal cord injury in mammals
After injury to the mammalian spinal cord, cells migrate to the injury site. Macrophages engulf dying cells, while astrocytes, fibroblasts and endothelial cells fill the cavity created by the injury. Some
of these cells express and secrete proteins that inhibit axonal growth. On the caudal side of the injury, axons that have been disconnected from their cell body begin to undergo a process called
Wallerian degeneration, which ultimately results in death of the axon.
Even though the association of dystrophic axons with reactive
astrocytes led to the idea that the glial scar is inhibitory for
axonal regeneration, it has been shown that reactive gliosis may
in fact be somewhat beneficial [42]. For example, one study
showed that, when reactive astrocytes where selectively ablated
in rats after a stub or crush injury, axonal degeneration and
demyelination were both increased and recovery of motor function
was reduced. This suggests that, rather than inhibiting axonal
growth, the role of the glial scar is to conceal or sequester the
damage caused by the injury and promote tissue repair [71].
Another study showed that reduced astrocytic reactivity in double
GFAP/vimentin-knockout mice actually improved motor function
recovery after hemitransection injuries [72]. The suggestion there
was that down-regulation of the proteins overexpressed by reactive
astrocytes could allow the scar to perform its protective role
without creating an inhibitory environment for axonal growth.
Beyond the cells involved, another important component of
the glial scar is the ECM (extracellular matrix) surrounding it.
After spinal cord injury, the levels of many ECM components
are markedly increased. These components include collagen IV,
α-laminin, γ -laminin, laminin-1 [73], KSPGs (keratan sulfate
proteoglycans) [74] and CSPGs (chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycans) [75]. In view of the enrichment of these components at
the injury site, it has been widely thought that the components of
the ECM act as inhibitory cues to axonal growth at the injury
site. Interesting work from the McMahon laboratory showed that
removing the CSPG glycosaminoglycan chains attenuates the
inhibitory activity of CSPGs and resulted in functional regrowth of
both ascending and descending axons in an in vivo model of spinal
cord injury [76]. More recent work from the Silver laboratory has
shown that a combination approach of removing the inhibitory
effect of the CSPGs combined with a peripheral nerve graft
could result in regeneration of serotonin-containing axons and
recovery of respiratory function [77]. However, growing evidence
suggests that not all neuronal cell types respond in the same way
to ECM-rich environments. Using a cellular grafting model after
dorsal column injury, Jones et al. [75] showed that nociceptive,
sensory and rubrospinal axons were able to grow into the graft
across a CSPG-rich environment in association with the CSPG
NG2. Moreover, studies using NG2-knockout mice showed that
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
358 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
CST (cortico-spinal track) axons did not improve regeneration
after spinal cord transection, suggesting that NG2 might not be
involved in axonal regeneration in vivo [78]. However, inhibition
of LAR (leucocyte common antigen-related), a receptor for
CSPGs, promoted axonal growth in the presence of CSPGs
in vitro and improved motor function recovery in mice after a
dorsal horn transection injury [79], suggesting that the different
CSPGs up-regulated after injury (NG2, brevican, neurocan and
versican) might have redundant roles in inhibiting axonal growth
and, furthermore, that the sensitivity to such an environment is
dependent on the expression of the CSPG receptors.
In species that have a natural ability to regenerate, less is known
about the composition of the ECM after injury. Fibronectin,
vimentin and cytokeratins are known to be up-regulated after
injury in salamanders [64,80], and in newts CSPGs are up-
regulated in the meninges and blood vessels, but not in the cells
at the lesion site [41]. However, tenascin-C is up-regulated in
Xenopus, newts, zebrafish and mammals after injury. In zebrafish
tenascin is up-regulated in the brainstem and spinal neurons
after injury, and inhibition by morpholinos after injury results
in impaired locomotive recovery and reduced axon regrowth,
suggesting a crucial role in promoting regeneration [81]. Although
tenascin-C is up-regulated in mammals after injury [82], it seems
that the levels are not enough to have a positive effect on
regeneration. Further work has shown that overexpression of
tenascin-C improves locomotive recovery after injury and reduces
the lesion size [83]. These results suggest that the response to
injury in some species promotes a more regeneration permissive
environment than in mammals; however, many of the pathways
are highly conserved.
Together, these studies point to an overall model of glial scar
functionality defined primarily by its important early role in
response to injury, assuring the structural stabilization of the
lesion site and thereby preventing further tissue damage. This then
carries the unfortunate drawback that this natural ‘bracing system’
in itself, at least partly because of the key proteins expressed
in building it, happens to be inhibitory to axonal regeneration
through the lesion site. Thus, according to this model, evolution
of the mammalian CNS repair system has carried a difficult trade-
off resulting in the flawed outcome we know all-too-well, i.e.
restoration of structural integrity being favoured at the expense of
functional recovery.
Myelin debris and its effect on axonal regeneration
In the mammalian CNS, oligodendrocytes produce myelin sheaths
that surround and insulate the axons, playing a key role in
enabling their fast saltatory transmission of excitatory signals.
While myelin sheaths can help to direct the regrowth of severed
peripheral neurons, they actually have the opposite effect in
the CNS, where they contribute strong inhibitors of axonal
outgrowth after injury. Much effort has therefore been dedicated
to understanding this inhibition, in hopes that this might reveal
the key factor(s) limiting our capacity for regenerative repair of
CNS injuries.
The group of Martin Schwab was the first to identify the
inhibitory effect of myelin and showed that this effect could
be attenuated by treatment with proteases [84]. Over 10 years
of work eventually led to the identification of the Nogo (neurite
outgrowth inhibitor) family of proteins [85]. Since this major
breakthrough, other inhibitory components of myelin have also
been discovered: the present discussion will focus on Nogo, MAG
(myelin-associated glycoprotein) and OMgp (oligodendrocyte-
myelin glycoprotein).
Nogo encodes at least three major splice variants, Nogo-A, -B
and -C. Nogo-A is highly expressed in oligodendrocytes and is
the only Nogo isoform to inhibit neurite outgrowth in vitro and
in vivo [85–87]. All three Nogo isoforms share a highly conserved
C-terminal ‘reticulon’ domain, containing an extracellular loop
called Nogo-66. Although the lack of expression of Nogo-A in
the PNS suggested that the B and C variants were not inhibitory
for axon regeneration [85], it was also shown that the conserved
lumenal/extracellular domain of the Nogo variants (Nogo-66)
was sufficient to induce growth cone collapse [88]. Subsequent
studies therefore intensified the testing of Nogo’s inhibitory role
in vivo after spinal cord injury. Using a dorsal hemi-section injury
model, rats treated with an antibody against Nogo-A [89] or a
peptide to block the Nogo-66 receptor [90] showed a modest, but
significant, improvement as compared with untreated controls, in
the recovery of motor function, as well as an incremental increase
in regenerated CST axons and raphespinal axons (serotonergic
fibres) [90]. This was confirmed by one study using the same
injury models performed in mutant mice lacking Nogo-A/B,
which showed similar results in terms of motor function recovery
and CST axon regeneration [91]. However, another study reported
that Nogo-A/B- or Nogo-A/B/C-null mice did not present any
improvement in motor function recovery or regeneration of
CST axons [92]. As pointed out by the authors, the different
genetic backgrounds of the mice used in these studies could be
a possible explanation for the contradictory results, or the dif-
ferent methods used to generate the knockout mice could in the
other studies have in fact altered other neighbouring genetic loci.
The Schwab laboratory has indeed shown that mice of different
genetic backgrounds (BL6 and Sv129) express markedly dif-
ferent levels of Nogo-A. Furthermore, although after a dorsal
hemi-section injury Nogo-A-null mutants showed more axon
sprouting on the rostral side of the injury in the BL6 background,
the equivalent mutants showed more CST regeneration caudal to
the injury in the Sv129 background [87]. These results reveal
that the inhibitory role of Nogo after injury can be detectably
modulated by differences in genetic backgrounds and confirms
that Nogo-A is not the only myelin-derived inhibitor of axon
regeneration.
Interesting work from the Stuermer laboratory has identified the
Xenopus orthologues of mammalian Nogo [93]. Xenopus Nogo-
A, like its mammalian counterpart, is mainly expressed in the
nervous system, specifically in myelinated fibre tracts of the spinal
cord, by a subpopulation of neurons and in oligodendrocytes.
It remains unclear whether Nogo-A expression increases as
Xenopus metamorphose and lose regenerative ability, or if
inhibiting Nogo-A at non-regenerative stages suffices to create
a regeneration-permissive environment after spinal cord injury.
The same laboratory has identified the zebrafish orthologues of
mammalian Nogo-A (RTN4/6) [94] and its receptor (NgR) [95].
The N-termini of zebrafish Nogo-A orthologues lack the Nogo-
A-specific inhibitory domain that inhibits axonal growth of fish
retinal axons in vitro [94]. The absence of this inhibitory domain,
along with the weak expression of NgR in the adult spinal cord
[95], may explain why no myelin-related inhibition is observed in
zebrafish after spinal cord injury [94,96]. To date, no conclusive
functional experiments to elucidate the role of zebrafish’s RTN4/6
or NgR during spinal cord regeneration have been reported.
Nonetheless, this body of work again illustrates that genes are
highly conserved between vertebrates and offers an interesting
paradigm in which to study regenerative capacity in different
species.
Among the other myelin inhibitors to be described so far
are MAG and OMgp [97]. MAG is a single transmembrane
sialic-acid-binding adhesion molecule expressed both by
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
Spinal cord regeneration 359
oligodendrocytes in the CNS and by Schwann cells in the PNS.
Although recombinant MAG induces growth cone collapse in
embryonic mouse hippocampal neurons and CGNs (cerebellar
granule neurons) in vitro [98], in MAG-deficient mice only a few
axons were detected caudal to the injury site [98,99]. The majority
of these axons seemed to circumvent the injury site, which might
be an indication that these axons were spared at the moment of
the injury rather than true regeneration [100]. These results also
suggest that MAG might not play as strong an inhibitory role after
injury as Nogo. One report suggests that MAG-null mice show
increased neuronal degeneration in comparison with wild-type
mice, correlated with decreased motor function behaviour [101].
Also, treatment of DRG with soluble MAG reduced vincristine-
induced axonal die-back in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. This
protective behaviour correlated with an increase in detyrosinated
tubulin (a sign of stable microtubules) and a decrease in tyrosin-
ated tubulin (more dynamic microtubules). The protective role of
MAG was also observed with other agents know to be deleterious
to axons (e.g. activated CD8 T-cell supernatant, granzyme and
acrylamide) [101]. Moreover MAG-null mice myelin induced
growth cone collapse and inhibition of neurite outgrowth in vitro
[98,102], further supporting the notion that MAG may not be
involved in axonal inhibition after spinal cord injury.
OMgp is a 110 kDa glycophosphatidylinositol-linked mem-
brane protein expressed in oligodendrocytes and in some
neurons. It has been shown that both soluble and immobilized
OMgp inhibit neurite outgrowth of E13 (E is embryonic
day) chick DRG in vitro, comparable with Nogo-66 inhibition
[103]. Also, OMgp-null mice of the 129BL6 mixed genetic
background showed improvement in motor function recovery
after complete transection, in comparison with wild-type mice
[104]. Interestingly, as was observed for Nogo [87], OMgp-null
mice of the BL6 background failed to show improvement in motor
function recovery in comparison with controls [104]. Moreover,
while OMgp-null 129BL6 mice showed serotonergic and sensory
axon regeneration beyond the injury site after hemi-section injury,
no improvement in CST axon regeneration was seen [104]. These
results suggest that although both OMgp and Nogo have inhibitory
effects for axon growth after injury, each one may affect different
types of neurons and, in both cases, the effects may be dependent
on the genetic background. These results may also suggest that
OMgp synergizes with Nogo to inhibit axonal growth after injury.
A study from the Strittmatter laboratory showed that myelin
extracted from triple-null mice for Nogo, MAG and OMgp did not
inhibit neurite outgrowth in vitro [105]. Furthermore, such triple-
null mice showed improvement in recovery of motor function,
alongside regeneration of CST and serotonergic fibres beyond the
scar in a dorsal single hemi-section injury model, suggesting that
Nogo, OMgp and MAG synergize after spinal cord injury [105].
However, a previous report showing that combined treatments
with OMgp and Nogo-66 did not enhance or accelerate growth
cone collapse in E13 chick DRG in vitro suggests that both
ligands seem to act independently rather than synergistically
[103]. Furthermore, another study performed using triple-null
mice for Nogo, MAG and OMgp showed no regeneration of
either serotonergic axons following complete transection injuries,
or CST axons following dorsal hemi-sections, as well as no motor
function recovery [106]. Again the discrepancy between studies
may be at least partly attributable to differences in the genetic
background of the mice used and the types of injury performed.
Interestingly, both studies showed that, in MAG single mutants
[106] or OMgp/MAG double mutants [105], motor function
recovery and CST axon regeneration were not improved and
could even be worsened. This further supports the notion that
MAG might play a protective role after spinal cord injury.
The overall data suggest that the in vivo role of myelin-derived
proteins after spinal cord injury remains only partially understood.
Further progress in this area will require increased clarity with
respect to such contributing factors as genetic background,
types of injury and neuronal susceptibility, to dissect out their
respective impacts on the inhibition of axonal growth by these
proteins after injury. In this context, it is also important to note
that myelin-derived inhibitory proteins are not the sole inhibitors
of axonal growth at the injury site. Indeed, many studies in
recent years have also documented such a role for classical axon
guidance proteins such as ephrins [97,107–110], semaphorin and
plexin [97,106,111–114], many of which are notably up-regulated
after injury. Their precise roles and potential interactions with
myelin-associated protein have yet to be fully elucidated.
Injury-induced changes to axons
Axons in the PNS show significant natural ability to regenerate
after injury; however, although this has been studied extensively
for many years, limited progress has been made to date on
transferring this ability to the CNS axons that show very limited
regenerative capacity. Major trauma to the spinal cord usually
results in damage to most axons, although some often do escape
injury. As described above, axon regeneration is inhibited by
extrinsic factors in the tissue environment, but also by intrinsic
changes within the axon itself and also by an age-dependent
decline in regenerative ability [115]. For an axon to regenerate
after injury, it must first seal off its membrane and reorganize its
cytoskeleton to form a growth cone [116]. The growth cone is a
specialized highly motile structure located at the growing tip of
a neurite, its centre being dominated by microtubules, whereas
its peripheral domains are more enriched in actin bundles [116].
Many studies of PNS neurons both in vitro and in vivo have
now shown that axon regeneration is driven by external cues in
the environment that trigger modulations of the cortical actin
cytoskeleton which then directs progression of the growth cone in
co-ordination with the dynamic ends of microtubules emanating
from the axon shaft and undergoing constant remodelling [117].
By comparison, as axons in the CNS fail to regenerate, they
do not form a growth cone in response to injury, and instead
form what is referred to as a ‘retraction bulb’ or ‘dystrophic
end bulb’, as originally described by Ramón y Cajal [118].
Dystrophic end bulbs vary in size and shape, but typically
involve a massive disorganization of the tightly packed and
uniformly orientated microtubule array post-injury, as well as
an accumulation of vesicles causing a notable swelling of the
tip of the axon [119]. Although this may seem like a dead-end
situation, some pioneering work has shown that, in fact, dystrophic
end bulbs retain the inherent ability to regenerate if placed in an
appropriately permissive environment: indeed, CNS axons can
regenerate into an implanted peripheral nerve graft even after
4 weeks in a non-permissive environment [120].
Although these observations relate to the portion of the axon
that is still connected to the neuronal cell body, the other portion
that is left on the other side of the injury typically undergoes rapid
‘Wallerian’ degeneration (Figure 1) [121]. Initially there is an
acute degeneration phase that actually affects both the proximal
and distal parts of the severed axon and has been shown to
be mediated via an influx of Ca2 + and activation of the Ca2 + -
dependent protease calpain (Figure 1) into the cut ends of the
axon [122]. This is followed by a latency period that can last
for 24–48 h during which the distal part of the axon remains
morphologically intact and is still electrically excitable for a short
period [123]. This is followed by a rapid degeneration phase
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
360 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
during which the cytoskeletal components of the axon disassemble
and macrophages invade the site, presumably to remove axonal
debris [124,125].
The understanding of these different phases of axonal
degeneration has led to many interesting attempts to protect distal
axons from degeneration. In vitro studies of cultured neurons first
showed that by culturing neurons in low Ca2 + conditions or by
chelating Ca2 + from the medium, neurons could be protected from
degeneration for up to 4 days post-axotomy [122]. Interestingly,
inhibition of calpain only delays degeneration for 12–24 h in vitro,
thus suggesting that there are other Ca2 + -dependent pathways
that are active in promoting degeneration of axons [126,127]. The
rapid sealing of the severed ends of axons suggests that the rise in
Ca2 + levels comes from release of stored intracellular Ca2 + within
the axon itself. Work on modulating specific ion channels has
shown that while blocking N-type channels has no effect, L-type
calcium channel blockers significantly delay axon degeneration
for up to 4 days post-axotomy [122]. An open question remains
as to whether rising levels of Ca2 + are a signal to activate axonal
degeneration or whether this comes from an upstream effector
signal?
Another type of signalling well known to be activated after
axonal injury is the JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) pathway.
Chemical inhibition of JNK has been shown to result in axon
protection for up to 48 h post-axotomy [128]. Loss of the DLK
(dual leucine zipper kinase) mitogen-activated kinase family or
inhibition of GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) gives a similar
effect. However, it remains unknown how these kinases are
activated and the neuronal protection effect is only observed
if the pathways are inhibited within the first 3 h post-axotomy,
suggesting that these kinases act as an early injury sensor [128].
Another key component of the axon that is targeted in axonal
protection strategies is the cytoskeleton. Degeneration of the axon
results in rapid depolymerization of the microtubules that are the
core structural component of the axon [116]. In normal axons,
the proteasome is responsible for regulating the normal turnover
of MAPs (microtubule-associated proteins) which assure both
the highly structured microtubule architecture and bidirectional
transport processes that it supports [129]. Inhibition of the
proteasome complex in injured axons has been shown to prevent
the turnover of such MAPs as tau and MAP1, which results in
increased stabilization of the microtubules, leading to protection
of the axon from degeneration [127]. In more recent studies,
the Bradke laboratory have shown that application of Taxol, a
drug that stabilizes microtubules, reduces scarring and promotes
axonal regeneration after injury in rats [130]. Taxol not only
stabilized microtubules in the axons, but also led to reduced
production of the glial scar proteins laminin, fibronectin and
collagen IV, suggesting that a more permissive environment was
created to allow axonal regeneration. Taxol appears to work
by preventing the trafficking of kinesin 1 and dynamin, therefore
preventing Smad2 from activating TGF-β (transforming growth
factor β) signalling, which is known to activate genes involved in
glial scar formation [130]. This approach offers new and exciting
potential for drug-based therapies which target more than one
cellular process. Although the full mechanism by which Taxol
promotes axon regeneration is still unclear, previous work from
the same laboratory has shown that low doses of Taxol can induce
axon formation in vitro [131].
In contrast with mammals, in species that do regenerate their
CNS we see various degrees of axonal regeneration, although
much remains to be understood about the process in these systems.
In the zebrafish both axonal degeneration and regeneration is
observed, whereas in salamanders it is unclear what exactly
happens to the axons on the caudal side of the injury (Table 1).
One of the most interesting and novel systems for studying
axonal regeneration in recent years is the invertebrate model
Caenorhabditis elegans. Admittedly, the invertebrates’ lack of
even the most rudimentary spinal cord would seem, at first
thought, to seriously restrict their potential contributions to this
field. Although this is fundamentally true, this limitation is
nonetheless well countered by the tremendous investigational
power afforded by C. elegans, through superb genetics tools, ever-
improving cytology, detailed developmental characterization and
genomic sequencing. By thereby accessing some of the most
elegant genome-scale screening methodologies available in any
model, researchers have been able to undertake molecular-level
dissections of those regenerative processes that are also observable
in these systems, particularly, as it happens, in the neural context
[132,133]
C. elegans has a relatively simple, highly invariant and uniquely
well characterized nervous system consisting of 302 neurons,
each of which offers a fully documented developmental lineage,
morphology and synaptic connectivity [134]. Despite much work
describing axonal outgrowth and pathfinding during C. elegans
development, studies of axon regeneration have only recently
begun [135,136]. The first study in C. elegans used femtolaser
surgery to perform careful axotomies and showed how these axons
can in fact regenerate [137]. This seminal study has effectively
launched a new field that has lead to more precise molecular
and cell biology descriptions of the factors necessary to promote
axonal regeneration, enabling very interesting and even broader
cross-species comparisons than ever before.
How axons regenerate in C. elegans depends largely on the
type of axon that is injured [138]. Interestingly, mechanosensory
axons regenerate via fusion of the proximal and distal ends of the
cut axon [139]. This occurs in two different scenarios: direct ‘end-
to-end’ fusion, meaning direct reconnection of the two severed
stumps, or ‘end-to-side’ fusion, whereby the proximal end of
the severed axon actively grows towards and finds its distal
stump. This suggests that the proximal end may be able to ‘seek’
and recognize its distal stump, and that both ends participate
in the reconnection process [139]. Ultrastructural studies have
shown that reconnection occurs via fusion of the two pieces,
both membrane and cytoplasm becoming continuous as a result
[139,140]. Although axon regeneration via fusion of severed ends
has also been described in other invertebrate species [141], this
seems to be a specific mechanism induced only in a subtype of
neurons. Intriguingly in mammals there have also been reports
of axonal regeneration via fusion of severed ends. The Bittner
laboratory have shown impressive PEG [poly(ethylene) glycol]-
facilitated fusion of rat axons both in vivo and in vitro after
transection or crush injury leading to improved rates of motor
function recovery after injury [142,143].
In most C. elegans neurons that get severed, however, the distal
portion of the axon, i.e. the one that is no longer connected to
the cell body, degenerates in a fashion that is at last superficially
reminiscent of the so-called Wallerian degeneration observed in
mammals [138,139].
Another area in which the study of axon regeneration in C.
elegans has been advantageous has been in understanding the role
of microtubule dynamics in vivo after injury. Although axonal
microtubules are normally kept in a stable steady-state, upon
injury these undergo significant changes to form a dynamic
growth cone that may involve growth of microtubule ends
and/or formation of new microtubule nucleating centres [116].
Following extensive in vitro studies in cultured neurons, the
in vivo C. elegans studies have revealed very important new
insights. A genetic screen for regulators of axonal regeneration
has identified several potential endogenous regulators of axonal
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
Spinal cord regeneration 361
microtubule dynamics [132]. Recent work has shown that in
injured mechanosensory neurons, microtubules increase at the
injury site at the same time as the depolymerizing kinesin KLP-
7 is down-regulated [144]. A second phase of axonal outgrowth
requires post-translational modifications of α-tubulin units by the
cytosolic carboxypeptidase CCPP-6. Interestingly both of these
phases of axon outgrowth were shown to be mediated by the DLK-
1 MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway [144]. That
work sheds important new insight into the dynamic process of
how a transected axon rearranges its cytoskeleton to form a new
growth cone and regenerate the axon.
These findings illustrate to what extent the C. elegans system
offers a powerful opportunity for studying the molecular and
cellular aspects of axonal regeneration. As noted above, since
C. elegans has no spinal cord and its axons are not myelinated,
the translational scope of these observations seems at first glance
unlikely to spread far beyond these aspects of axonal regeneration
inherent to the basic biology of neurons themselves. However,
given the identification of highly conserved signalling molecules
and the recent descriptions of glial cells in C. elegans [145],
this system’s future utility may in fact extend beyond neurons
themselves and into the core issue of neuron–glial interactions.
STEM CELLS AND SPINAL CORD INJURY REPAIR
Most current clinical therapies for spinal cord injury focus on
limiting inflammation, secondary cell death and on potentially
enhancing and expanding the functionality of spared circuits.
As such, the promotion of axonal regeneration is typically left
unaddressed. As we have learned more about the environment
after spinal cord injury, more focus has been placed on creating
more permissive surroundings for axonal growth and potential
cell replacement therapies [146]. Below we will briefly discuss
the most recent advances in this field.
To date, most research has focused on modulation of growth
factors and known inhibitory molecules as avenues for promoting
axonal regrowth. BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) is
probably one of the most studied and the one that has to date
offered the most potential for therapies [147–150]. Increasing
the levels of BDNF after injury in animal models appears
to initially increase motor recovery, although this effect does
diminish at later time points, suggesting that BDNF may act in a
neuroprotective capacity, possibly by recruiting oligodendrocytes
and replacing myelin on cut axons [151,152]. Interestingly, further
work has shown improved axonal regrowth when BDNF is
used in conjunction with a fibroblast implant, suggesting that
giving the severed axons a cellular support to grow on may
increase axonogenesis. Many other growth factors have been
tested in similar approaches, but BDNF has so far shown the
most convincing effect (reviewed in [153,154]).
Tissue engineering strategies have over recent years shown a
big surge [155]. As spinal cord injury in mammals results in
the formation of a cyst, this results in a suboptimal substrate
for neuronal regrowth. To date, a number of different substrates
have been tested in vitro and in vivo, alone or in combination
with growth factors or cells. Some recently published studies
have shown very promising data using implantation of cells into
the lesion site. One study tested implantation of GFP-positive
neural stem cells embedded in a fibrin gel coating growth factor.
These cells differentiated in neurons that surprisingly projected
axons over very long distances and formed high numbers of
electrically active synapsis [146]. In similar experiments they
also implanted human stem cells in the same type of fibrin gel
into the lesion site and this also resulted in increased functional
recovery and formation of new neural circuits, suggesting that
young neurons can overcome the inhibitory environment of the
injury. Interestingly this work also showed that this strategy could
work even when the implant takes place up to 1 week after injury
[146].
However, the implantation of any type of stem cell always
carries with it the risk of tumour formation at later stages. The
Okada group has recently reported very careful work examining
at a molecular level the fate of cells after they are implanted into
an injury site. Their work using RNA-Seq suggests that although
directly after implantation the graft acts in a neuroprotective role,
overall transcriptional activity and external signal transduction
were significantly suppressed in cells transplanted into an
injured spinal cord compared with transplantations into other
environments [156]. That work also showed that transplantation of
too many cells in fact inhibited functional recovery, emphasizing
a need to carefully develop protocols to optimize integration,
recovery and to limit tumour formation.
PERSPECTIVE
As discussed above, ongoing research efforts driven by ever-
more powerful uses of well-chosen model organisms are now
furthering our understanding of naturally occurring spinal cord
regeneration systems by steadily adding crucial cellular and
molecular level details to the picture. This is providing the solid
basis needed for conducting translational analyses that will help
to elucidate those key pathways and mechanisms that distinguish
such fully functional repair processes from our own flawed, non-
functional and merely structural healing. As a result, this approach
promises to open innovative new avenues for overcoming such
core challenges as the inhibition of axonal regrowth by the glial
scar, myelin debris and other factors, and thereby developing the
types of new and improved treatment modalities that all such
patients are hoping for.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank C. Echeverri and J. Essig for useful discussions and feedback on the review
before submission.
REFERENCES
1 Aristotle (1910) Historia animalium. The Clarendon Press, Oxford
2 Reaumur, R. (1712) Sur les diverses reproductions qui se font dans les Ecrevisse, les
Omars, les Crabes, etc. et entr’autres sur celles de leurs Jambes et de leurs Ecailles.
Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences 1712, 223–241
3 Goss, R. J. and Russell, L. (1969) Principles of Regeneration. Academic Press, New York.
4 Becker, C. and Becker, T. (2008) Adult zebrafish as a model for successful central
nervous system regeneration. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 26, 71–80
5 Hui, S., Dutta, A. and Ghosh, S. (2010) Cellular response after crush injury in adult
zebrafish spinal cord. Dev. Dyn. 239, 2962–2979
6 Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T., Jusuf, P., Hall, T., Nguyen-Chi, M. and Currie, P. (2012)
Fgf-dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish. J.
Neurosci. 32, 7477–7492
7 Dias, T., Yang, Y.-J., Ogai, K., Becker, T. and Becker, C. (2012) Notch signaling controls
generation of motor neurons in the lesioned spinal cord of adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci.
32, 3245–3252
8 Meletis, K., Barnabé-Heider, F., Carlén, M., Evergren, E., Tomilin, N., Shupliakov, O. and
Frisén, J. (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of ependymal
cells. PLoS Biol. 6, e182
9 Barnabé-Heider, F., Göritz, C., Sabelström, H., Takebayashi, H., Pfrieger, F., Meletis, K.
and Frisén, J. (2010) Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal cord. Cell
Stem Cell 7, 470–482
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
362 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
10 Johansson, C., Momma, S., Clarke, D., Risling, M., Lendahl, U. and Frisén, J. (1999)
Identification of a neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell
96, 25–34
11 Yamamoto, S., Nagao, M., Sugimori, M., Kosako, H., Nakatomi, H., Yamamoto, N.,
Takebayashi, H., Nabeshima, Y., Kitamura, T., Weinmaster, G. et al. (2001) Transcription
factor expression and Notch-dependent regulation of neural progenitors in the adult rat
spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 21, 9814–9823
12 Becker, T., Wullimann, M., Becker, C., Bernhardt, R. and Schachner, M. (1997) Axonal
regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 577–595
13 Becker, T. and Becker, C. (2001) Regenerating descending axons preferentially reroute to
the gray matter in the presence of a general macrophage/microglial reaction caudal to a
spinal transection in adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol. 433, 131–147
14 Kuscha, V., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Becker, C. and Becker, T. (2012) Plasticity of tyrosine
hydroxylase and serotonergic systems in the regenerating spinal cord of adult zebrafish.
J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 933–951
15 Gibbs, K., Chittur, S. and Szaro, B. (2011) Metamorphosis and the regenerative capacity
of spinal cord axons in Xenopus laevis. Eur. J. Neurosci. 33, 9–25
16 Beattie, M., Bresnahan, J. and Lopate, G. (1990) Metamorphosis alters the response to
spinal cord transection in Xenopus laevis frogs. J. Neurobiol. 21, 1108–1122
17 Harrison, R. G. (1898) The growth and regeneration of the tail of the frog larva. Dev.
Genes Evol. 7, 430–485
18 Rose, G. H. (1907) Observations of the living developing nerve fiber. Anat. Rec. 1,
116–128
19 Gargioli, C. and Slack, J. (2004) Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail regeneration.
Development 131, 2669–2679
20 Sugiura, T., Tazaki, A., Ueno, N., Watanabe, K. and Mochii, M. (2009) Xenopus Wnt-5a
induces an ectopic larval tail at injured site, suggesting a crucial role for noncanonical
Wnt signal in tail regeneration. Mech. Dev. 126, 56–67
21 Beck, C., Christen, B. and Slack, J. (2003) Molecular pathways needed for regeneration
of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429–439
22 Lin, G. and Slack, J. (2008) Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in Xenopus tadpole
tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 316, 323–335
23 Beck, C. and Slack, J. (1999) A developmental pathway controlling outgrowth of the
Xenopus tail bud. Development 126, 1611–1620
24 Beck, C. and Slack, J. (2002) Notch is required for outgrowth of the Xenopus tail bud.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 46, 255–258
25 Borgens, R., Vanable, J. and Jaffe, L. (1979) Role of subdermal current shunts in the
failure of frogs to regenerate. J. Exp. Zool. 209, 49–56
26 Borgens, R., Vanable, J. and Jaffe, L. (1979) Reduction of sodium dependent stump
currents disturbs urodele limb regeneration. J. Exp. Zool. 209, 377–386
27 Adams, D., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2007) H+ pump-dependent changes in membrane
voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 134, 1323–1335
28 Tseng, A.-S., Beane, W., Lemire, J., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2010) Induction of
vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium current. J. Neurosci. 30, 13192–13200
29 Gaete, M., Muñoz, R., Sánchez, N., Tampe, R., Moreno, M., Contreras, E., Lee-Liu, D.
and Larráın, J. (2012) Spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles proceeds through
activation of Sox2-positive cells. Neural Dev. 7, 13
30 Gibbs, K. and Szaro, B. (2006) Regeneration of descending projections in Xenopus
laevis tadpole spinal cord demonstrated by retrograde double labeling. Brain Res. 1088,
68–72
31 Fawcett, J. and Asher, R. (1999) The glial scar and central nervous system repair. Brain
Res. Bull. 49, 377–391
32 Slack, J., Lin, G. and Chen, Y. (2008) The Xenopus tadpole: a new model for
regeneration research. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65, 54–63
33 Love, N., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., Mohun, T., Paredes,
R., Zeef, L. and Amaya, E. (2011) Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during
Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev. Biol. 11, 70
34 Brockes, J. and Kumar, A. (2008) Comparative aspects of animal regeneration. Annu.
Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 24, 525–549
35 Tanaka, E. and Ferretti, P. (2009) Considering the evolution of regeneration in the central
nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 713–723
36 Ehrlich, D. and Mark, R. (1977) Fiber counts of regenerating peripheral nerves in
axolotls and the effect of metamorphosis. J. Comp. Neurol. 174, 307–316
37 Seifert, A., Monaghan, J., Voss, S. and Maden, M. (2012) Skin regeneration in adult
axolotls: a blueprint for scar-free healing in vertebrates. PLoS ONE 7, e32875
38 Butler, E. and Ward, M. (1965) Reconstitution of the spinal cord following ablation in
urodele larvae. J. Exp. Zool. 160, 47–65
39 Butler, E. and Ward, M. (1967) Reconstitution of the spinal cord after ablation in adult
Triturus. Dev. Biol. 15, 464–486
40 Clarke, J., Alexander, R. and Holder, N. (1988) Regeneration of descending axons in the
spinal cord of the axolotl. Neurosci. Lett. 89, 1–6
41 Zukor, K., Kent, D. and Odelberg, S. (2011) Meningeal cells and glia establish a
permissive environment for axon regeneration after spinal cord injury in newts. Neural
Dev. 6, 1
42 Silver, J. and Miller, J. (2004) Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5,
146–156
43 Egar, M. and Singer, M. (1972) The role of ependyma in spinal cord regeneration in the
urodele, Triturus. Exp. Neurol. 37, 422–430
44 Singer, M., Nordlander, R. and Egar, M. (1979) Axonal guidance during embryogenesis
and regeneration in the spinal cord of the newt: the blueprint hypothesis of neuronal
pathway patterning. J. Comp. Neurol. 185, 1–21
45 Géraudie, J., Nordlander, R., Singer, M. and Singer, J. (1988) Early stages of spinal
ganglion formation during tail regeneration in the newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. Am.
J. Anat. 183, 359–370
46 Howard, H. (1951) Reconstitution of the urodele spinal cord following unilateral
ablation. Part I. Chronology of neuron regulation. J. Exp. Zool. 117, 523–557
47 Sybil, W. H. (1956) The inductive activity of the spinal cord in urodele tail regeneration.
J. Morphol. 99, 1–39
48 Iten, L. and Bryant, S. (1976) Stages of tail regeneration in the adult newt,
Notophthalmus viridescens. J. Exp. Zool. 196, 283–292
49 Iten, L. and Bryant, S. (1976) Regeneration from different levels along the tail of the
newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. J. Exp. Zool. 196, 293–306
50 Zhang, F., Ferretti, P. and Clarke, J. (2003) Recruitment of postmitotic neurons into the
regenerating spinal cord of urodeles. Dev. Dyn. 226, 341–348
51 Echeverri, K. and Tanaka, E. (2003) Electroporation as a tool to study in vivo spinal cord
regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 226, 418–425
52 McHedlishvili, L., Mazurov, V. and Tanaka, E. (2012) Reconstitution of the central
nervous system during salamander tail regeneration from the implanted neurospheres.
Methods Mol. Biol. 916, 197–202
53 Schnapp, E., Kragl, M., Rubin, L. and Tanaka, E. (2005) Hedgehog signaling controls
dorsoventral patterning, blastema cell proliferation and cartilage induction during axolotl
tail regeneration. Development 132, 3243–3253
54 McHedlishvili, L., Epperlein, H., Telzerow, A. and Tanaka, E. (2007) A clonal analysis of
neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration reveals evidence for both
spatially restricted and multipotent progenitors. Development 134, 2083–2093
55 Sehm, T., Sachse, C., Frenzel, C. and Echeverri, K. (2009) miR-196 is an essential
early-stage regulator of tail regeneration, upstream of key spinal cord patterning events.
Dev. Biol. 334, 468–480
56 Zhang, F., Clarke, J. and Ferretti, P. (2000) FGF-2 Up-regulation and proliferation of
neural progenitors in the regenerating amphibian spinal cord in vivo. Dev. Biol. 225,
381–391
57 Moftah, M., Landry, M., Nagy, F. and Cabelguen, J.-M. (2008) Fibroblast growth factor-2
mRNA expression in the brainstem and spinal cord of normal and chronic spinally
transected urodeles. J. Neurosci. Res. 86, 3348–3358
58 Carlson, M., Komine, Y., Bryant, S. and Gardiner, D. (2001) Expression of Hoxb13 and
Hoxc10 in developing and regenerating axolotl limbs and tails. Dev. Biol. 229, 396–406
59 Caubit, X., Nicolas, S. and Le Parco, Y. (1997) Possible roles for Wnt genes in growth
and axial patterning during regeneration of the tail in urodele amphibians. Dev. Dyn.
210, 1–10
60 Monaghan, J., Walker, J., Page, R., Putta, S., Beachy, C. and Voss, S. (2007) Early gene
expression during natural spinal cord regeneration in the salamander Ambystoma
mexicanum. J. Neurochem. 101, 27–40
61 Echeverri, K. and Tanaka, E. (2002) Ectoderm to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298, 1993–1996
62 Norton, W., Aquino, D., Hozumi, I., Chiu, F. and Brosnan, C. (1992) Quantitative aspects
of reactive gliosis: a review. Neurochem. Res. 17, 877–885
63 Sofroniew, M. (2009) Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar
formation. Trends Neurosci. 32, 638–647
64 O’Hara, C., Egar, M. and Chernoff, E. (1992) Reorganization of the ependyma during
axolotl spinal cord regeneration: changes in intermediate filament and fibronectin
expression. Dev. Dyn. 193, 103–115
65 Gwak, Y., Kang, J., Unabia, G. and Hulsebosch, C. (2012) Spatial and temporal
activation of spinal glial cells: role of gliopathy in central neuropathic pain following
spinal cord injury in rats. Exp. Neurol. 234, 362–372
66 Busch, S., Horn, K., Cuascut, F., Hawthorne, A., Bai, L., Miller, R. and Silver, J. (2010)
Adult NG2 + cells are permissive to neurite outgrowth and stabilize sensory axons
during macrophage-induced axonal dieback after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 30,
255–265
67 Streit, W., Walter, S. and Pennell, N. (1999) Reactive microgliosis. Prog. Neurobiol. 57,
563–581
68 Horn, K., Busch, S., Hawthorne, A., van Rooijen, N. and Silver, J. (2008) Another barrier
to regeneration in the CNS: activated macrophages induce extensive retraction of
dystrophic axons through direct physical interactions. J. Neurosci. 28, 9330–9341
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
Spinal cord regeneration 363
69 Wu, B., Matic, D., Djogo, N., Szpotowicz, E., Schachner, M. and Jakovcevski, I. (2012)
Improved regeneration after spinal cord injury in mice lacking functional T- and
B-lymphocytes. Exp. Neurol. 237, 274–285
70 Göritz, C., Dias, D., Tomilin, N., Barbacid, M., Shupliakov, O. and Frisén, J. (2011) A
pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 333, 238–242
71 Faulkner, J., Herrmann, J., Woo, M., Tansey, K., Doan, N. and Sofroniew, M. (2004)
Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury. J.
Neurosci. 24, 2143–2155
72 Menet, V., Prieto, M., Privat, A. and Gimenez y Ribotta, M. (2003) Axonal plasticity and
functional recovery after spinal cord injury in mice deficient in both glial fibrillary acidic
protein and vimentin genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 8999–9004
73 Liesi, P. and Kauppila, T. (2002) Induction of type IV collagen and other
basement-membrane-associated proteins after spinal cord injury of the adult rat may
participate in formation of the glial scar. Exp. Neurol. 173, 31–45
74 Krautstrunk, M., Scholtes, F., Martin, D., Schoenen, J., Schmitt, A. B., Plate, D.,
Nacimiento, W., Noth, J. and Brook, G. A. (2002) Increased expression of the putative
axon growth-repulsive extracellular matrix molecule, keratan sulphate proteoglycan,
following traumatic injury of the adult rat spinal cord. Acta Neuropathol. 104, 592–600
75 Jones, L. L., Sajed, D. and Tuszynski, M. H. (2003) Axonal regeneration through regions
of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan deposition after spinal cord injury: a balance of
permissiveness and inhibition. J. Neurosci. 23, 9276–9288
76 Bradbury, E., Moon, L., Popat, R., King, V., Bennett, G., Patel, P., Fawcett, J. and
McMahon, S. (2002) Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal
cord injury. Nature 416, 636–640
77 Alilain, W., Horn, K., Hu, H., Dick, T. and Silver, J. (2011) Functional regeneration of
respiratory pathways after spinal cord injury. Nature 475, 196–200
78 Hossain-Ibrahim, M. K., Rezajooi, K., Stallcup, W. B., Lieberman, A. R. and Anderson,
P. N. (2007) Analysis of axonal regeneration in the central and peripheral nervous
systems of the NG2-deficient mouse. BMC Neurosci. 8, 80
79 Fisher, D., Xing, B., Dill, J., Li, H., Hoang, H. H., Zhao, Z., Yang, X. L., Bachoo, R.,
Cannon, S., Longo, F. M. et al. (2011) Leukocyte common antigen-related phosphatase
is a functional receptor for chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan axon growth inhibitors. J.
Neurosci. 31, 14051–14066
80 Chernoff, E. A. (1996) Spinal cord regeneration: a phenomenon unique to urodeles? Int.
J. Dev. Biol. 40, 823–831
81 Yu, Y. M., Cristofanilli, M., Valiveti, A., Ma, L., Yoo, M., Morellini, F. and Schachner, M.
(2011) The extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin-C promotes locomotor recovery
after spinal cord injury in adult zebrafish. Neuroscience 183, 238–250
82 Zhang, Y., Winterbottom, J., Schachner, M., Lieberman, A. and Anderson, P. (1997)
Tenascin-C expression and axonal sprouting following injury to the spinal dorsal
columns in the adult rat. J. Neurosci. Res. 49, 433–450
83 Chen, J., Joon Lee, H., Jakovcevski, I., Shah, R., Bhagat, N., Loers, G., Liu, H.-Y.,
Meiners, S., Taschenberger, G., Kügler, S. et al. (2010) The extracellular matrix
glycoprotein tenascin-C is beneficial for spinal cord regeneration. Mol. Ther. 18,
1769–1777
84 Caroni, P. and Schwab, M. (1988) Two membrane protein fractions from rat central
myelin with inhibitory properties for neurite growth and fibroblast spreading. J. Cell
Biol. 106, 1281–1288
85 Chen, M., Huber, A., van der Haar, M., Frank, M., Schnell, L., Spillmann, A., Christ, F.
and Schwab, M. (2000) Nogo-A is a myelin-associated neurite outgrowth inhibitor and
an antigen for monoclonal antibody IN-1. Nature 403, 434–439
86 Schwab, M. (2004) Nogo and axon regeneration. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14, 118–124
87 Dimou, L., Schnell, L., Montani, L., Duncan, C., Simonen, M., Schneider, R., Liebscher,
T., Gullo, M. and Schwab, M. (2006) Nogo-A-deficient mice reveal strain-dependent
differences in axonal regeneration. J. Neurosci. 26, 5591–5603
88 GrandPré, T., Nakamura, F., Vartanian, T. and Strittmatter, S. (2000) Identification of the
Nogo inhibitor of axon regeneration as a Reticulon protein. Nature 403, 439–444
89 Merkler, D., Metz, G., Raineteau, O., Dietz, V., Schwab, M. and Fouad, K. (2001)
Locomotor recovery in spinal cord-injured rats treated with an antibody neutralizing the
myelin-associated neurite growth inhibitor Nogo-A. J. Neurosci. 21, 3665–3673
90 GrandPré, T., Li, S. and Strittmatter, S. (2002) Nogo-66 receptor antagonist peptide
promotes axonal regeneration. Nature 417, 547–551
91 Kim, J., Li, S., GrandPré, T., Qiu, D. and Strittmatter, S. (2003) Axon regeneration in
young adult mice lacking Nogo-A/B. Neuron 38, 187–199
92 Zheng, B., Ho, C., Li, S., Keirstead, H., Steward, O. and Tessier-Lavigne, M. (2003) Lack
of enhanced spinal regeneration in Nogo-deficient mice. Neuron 38, 213–224
93 Klinger, M., Diekmann, H., Heinz, D., Hirsch, C., Hannbeck von Hanwehr, S., Petrausch,
B., Oertle, T., Schwab, M. and Stuermer, C. (2004) Identification of two NOGO/RTN4
genes and analysis of Nogo-A expression in Xenopus laevis. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 25,
205–216
94 Diekmann, H., Klinger, M., Oertle, T., Heinz, D., Pogoda, H.-M., Schwab, M. and
Stuermer, C. (2005) Analysis of the reticulon gene family demonstrates the absence of
the neurite growth inhibitor Nogo-A in fish. Mol. Biol. Evol. 22, 1635–1648
95 Klinger, M., Taylor, J., Oertle, T., Schwab, M., Stuermer, C. and Diekmann, H. (2004)
Identification of Nogo-66 receptor (NgR) and homologous genes in fish. Mol. Biol. Evol.
21, 76–85
96 Shypitsyna, A., Málaga-Trillo, E., Reuter, A. and Stuermer, C. (2011) Origin of Nogo-A by
domain shuffling in an early jawed vertebrate. Mol. Biol. Evol. 28, 1363–1370
97 Sandvig, A., Berry, M., Barrett, L. B., Butt, A. and Logan, A. (2004) Myelin-, reactive
glia-, and scar-derived CNS axon growth inhibitors: expression, receptor signaling, and
correlation with axon regeneration. Glia 46, 225–251
98 Li, M., Shibata, A., Li, C., Braun, P., McKerracher, L., Roder, J., Kater, S. and David, S.
(1996) Myelin-associated glycoprotein inhibits neurite/axon growth and causes growth
cone collapse. J. Neurosci. Res. 46, 404–414
99 Bartsch, U., Bandtlow, C., Schnell, L., Bartsch, S., Spillmann, A., Rubin, B., Hillenbrand,
R., Montag, D., Schwab, M. and Schachner, M. (1995) Lack of evidence that
myelin-associated glycoprotein is a major inhibitor of axonal regeneration in the CNS.
Neuron 15, 1375–1381
100 Steward, O., Zheng, B. and Tessier-Lavigne, M. (2003) False resurrections:
distinguishing regenerated from spared axons in the injured central nervous system. J.
Comp. Neurol. 459, 1–8
101 Nguyen, T., Mehta, N., Conant, K., Kim, K.-J., Jones, M., Calabresi, P., Melli, G., Hoke,
A., Schnaar, R., Ming, G.-L. et al. (2009) Axonal protective effects of the
myelin-associated glycoprotein. J. Neurosci. 29, 630–637
102 Lee, J., Geoffroy, C., Chan, A., Tolentino, K., Crawford, M., Leal, M., Kang, B. and Zheng,
B. (2010) Assessing spinal axon regeneration and sprouting in Nogo-, MAG-, and
OMgp-deficient mice. Neuron 66, 663–670
103 Wang, K., Koprivica, V., Kim, J., Sivasankaran, R., Guo, Y., Neve, R. and He, Z. (2002)
Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein is a Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite
outgrowth. Nature 417, 941–944
104 Ji, B., Case, L., Liu, K., Shao, Z., Lee, X., Yang, Z., Wang, J., Tian, T., Shulga-Morskaya,
S., Scott, M. et al. (2008) Assessment of functional recovery and axonal sprouting in
oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMgp) null mice after spinal cord injury. Mol.
Cell. Neurosci. 39, 258–267
105 Cafferty, W., Duffy, P., Huebner, E. and Strittmatter, S. (2010) MAG and OMgp synergize
with Nogo-A to restrict axonal growth and neurological recovery after spinal cord
trauma. J. Neurosci. 30, 6825–6837
106 Lee, J., Chow, R., Xie, F., Chow, S., Tolentino, K. and Zheng, B. (2010) Combined
genetic attenuation of myelin and semaphorin-mediated growth inhibition is insufficient
to promote serotonergic axon regeneration. J. Neurosci. 30, 10899–10904
107 Benson, M., Romero, M., Lush, M., Lu, Q., Henkemeyer, M. and Parada, L. (2005)
Ephrin-B3 is a myelin-based inhibitor of neurite outgrowth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 10694–10699
108 Arocho, L., Figueroa, J., Torrado, A., Santiago, J., Vera, A. and Miranda, J. (2011)
Expression profile and role of EphrinA1 ligand after spinal cord injury. Cell. Mol.
Neurobiol. 31, 1057–1069
109 Goldshmit, Y., Spanevello, M., Tajouri, S., Li, L., Rogers, F., Pearse, M., Galea, M.,
Bartlett, P., Boyd, A. and Turnley, A. (2011) EphA4 blockers promote axonal regeneration
and functional recovery following spinal cord injury in mice. PLoS ONE 6, e24636
110 Duffy, P., Wang, X., Siegel, C., Seigel, C., Tu, N., Henkemeyer, M., Cafferty, W. and
Strittmatter, S. (2012) Myelin-derived ephrinB3 restricts axonal regeneration and
recovery after adult CNS injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 5063–5068
111 De Winter, F., Oudega, M., Lankhorst, A., Hamers, F., Blits, B., Ruitenberg, M.,
Pasterkamp, R., Gispen, W. and Verhaagen, J. (2002) Injury-induced class 3 semaphorin
expression in the rat spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 175, 61–75
112 Niclou, S., Franssen, E., Ehlert, E., Taniguchi, M. and Verhaagen, J. (2003) Meningeal
cell-derived semaphorin 3A inhibits neurite outgrowth. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 24,
902–912
113 Moreau-Fauvarque, C., Kumanogoh, A., Camand, E., Jaillard, C., Barbin, G., Boquet, I.,
Love, C., Jones, E., Kikutani, H., Lubetzki, C. et al. (2003) The transmembrane
semaphorin Sema4D/CD100, an inhibitor of axonal growth, is expressed on
oligodendrocytes and upregulated after CNS lesion. J. Neurosci. 23, 9229–9239
114 Shim, S.-O., Cafferty, W., Schmidt, E., Kim, B., Fujisawa, H. and Strittmatter, S. (2012)
PlexinA2 limits recovery from corticospinal axotomy by mediating
oligodendrocyte-derived Sema6A growth inhibition. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 50, 193–200
115 Moore, D., Blackmore, M., Hu, Y., Kaestner, K., Bixby, J., Lemmon, V. and Goldberg, J.
(2009) KLF family members regulate intrinsic axon regeneration ability. Science 326,
298–301
116 Bradke, F., Fawcett, J. and Spira, M. (2012) Assembly of a new growth cone after
axotomy: the precursor to axon regeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 183–193
117 Hoffman, P. (2010) A conditioning lesion induces changes in gene expression and
axonal transport that enhance regeneration by increasing the intrinsic growth state of
axons. Exp. Neurol. 223, 11–18
118 Ramón y Cajal, S. (1928) Degeneration and Regeneration of the Nervous System,
Volume 1, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
364 J. F. Diaz Quiroz and K. Echeverri
119 Ertürk, A., Hellal, F., Enes, J. and Bradke, F. (2007) Disorganized microtubules underlie
the formation of retraction bulbs and the failure of axonal regeneration. J. Neurosci. 27,
9169–9180
120 Houle, J. (1991) Demonstration of the potential for chronically injured neurons to
regenerate axons into intraspinal peripheral nerve grafts. Exp. Neurol. 113, 1–9
121 Kerschensteiner, M., Schwab, M., Lichtman, J. and Misgeld, T. (2005) In vivo imaging of
axonal degeneration and regeneration in the injured spinal cord. Nat. Med. 11, 572–577
122 George, E., Glass, J. and Griffin, J. (1995) Axotomy-induced axonal degeneration is
mediated by calcium influx through ion-specific channels. J. Neurosci. 15, 6445–6452
123 Tsao, J., Brown, M., Carden, M., McLean, W. and Perry, V. (1994) Loss of the compound
action potential: an electrophysiological, biochemical and morphological study of early
events in axonal degeneration in the C57BL/Ola mouse. Eur. J. Neurosci. 6, 516–524
124 Lubińska, L. (1982) Patterns of Wallerian degeneration of myelinated fibres in short and
long peripheral stumps and in isolated segments of rat phrenic nerve. Interpretation of
the role of axoplasmic flow of the trophic factor. Brain Res. 233, 227–240
125 Griffin, J., George, R., Lobato, C., Tyor, W., Yan, L. and Glass, J. (1992) Macrophage
responses and myelin clearance during Wallerian degeneration: relevance to
immune-mediated demyelination. J. Neuroimmunol. 40, 153–165
126 Finn, J., Weil, M., Archer, F., Siman, R., Srinivasan, A. and Raff, M. (2000) Evidence that
Wallerian degeneration and localized axon degeneration induced by local neurotrophin
deprivation do not involve caspases. J. Neurosci. 20, 1333–1341
127 Zhai, Q., Wang, J., Kim, A., Liu, Q., Watts, R., Hoopfer, E., Mitchison, T., Luo, L. and He,
Z. (2003) Involvement of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in the early stages of
Wallerian degeneration. Neuron 39, 217–225
128 Miller, B., Press, C., Daniels, R., Sasaki, Y., Milbrandt, J. and DiAntonio, A. (2009) A
dual leucine kinase-dependent axon self-destruction program promotes Wallerian
degeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 387–389
129 Ehlers, M. (2004) Deconstructing the axon: Wallerian degeneration and the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Trends Neurosci. 27, 3–6
130 Hellal, F., Hurtado, A., Ruschel, J., Flynn, K., Laskowski, C., Umlauf, M., Kapitein, L.,
Strikis, D., Lemmon, V., Bixby, J. et al. (2011) Microtubule stabilization reduces scarring
and causes axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Science 331, 928–931
131 Witte, H., Neukirchen, D. and Bradke, F. (2008) Microtubule stabilization specifies initial
neuronal polarization. J. Cell Biol. 180, 619–632
132 Chen, L., Wang, Z., Ghosh-Roy, A., Hubert, T., Yan, D., O’Rourke, S., Bowerman, B., Wu,
Z., Jin, Y. and Chisholm, A. (2011) Axon regeneration pathways identified by systematic
genetic screening in C. elegans. Neuron 71, 1043–1057
133 Chiu, H., Alqadah, A., Chuang, C.-F. and Chang, C. (2011) C. elegans as a genetic
model to identify novel cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying nervous system
regeneration. Cell Adhes. Migr. 5, 387–394
134 White, J., Southgate, E., Thomson, J. and Brenner, S. (1986) The structure of the
nervous system of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London
Ser. B 314, 1–340
135 Chen, L. and Chisholm, A. (2011) Axon regeneration mechanisms: insights from C.
elegans. Trends Cell Biol. 21, 577–584
136 El Bejjani, R. and Hammarlund, M. (2012) Neural regeneration in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Annu. Rev. Genet. 46, 499–513
137 Yanik, M. F., Cinar, H., Cinar, H., Chisholm, A. D., Jin, Y. and Ben-Yakar, A. (2004)
Functional regeneration after laser axotomy. Nature 432, 822
138 Yanik, M. F., Cinar, H., Cinar, H. N., Gibby, A., Chisholm, A. D., Jin, Y. and Ben-Yakar, A.
(2006) Nerve regeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans after femtosecond laser axotomy.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 12, 1283–1291
139 Neumann, B., Nguyen, K., Hall, D., Ben-Yakar, A and Hilliard, M. (2011) Axonal
regeneration proceeds through specific axonal fusion in transected C. elegans neurons.
Dev. Dyn. 240, 1365–1372
140 Ghosh-Roy, A., Wu, Z., Goncharov, A., Jin, Y. and Chisholm, A. (2010) Calcium and
cyclic AMP promote axonal regeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans and require DLK-1
kinase. J. Neurosci. 30, 3175–3183
141 Deriemer, S., Elliott, E., Macagno, E. and Muller, K. (1983) Morphological evidence that
regenerating axons can fuse with severed axon segments. Brain Res. 272, 157–161
142 Britt, J., Kane, J., Spaeth, C., Zuzek, A., Robinson, G., Gbanaglo, M., Estler, C.,
Boydston, E., Schallert, T. and Bittner, G. (2010) Polyethylene glycol rapidly restores
axonal integrity and improves the rate of motor behavior recovery after sciatic nerve
crush injury. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 695–703
143 Lore, A., Hubbell, J. and Bobb, D. (1999) Rapid induction of functional and
morphological continuity between severed ends of mammalian or earthworm myelinated
axons. J. Neurosci. 19, 2442–2454
144 Ghosh-Roy, A., Goncharov, A., Jin, Y. and Chisholm, A. (2012) Kinesin-13 and tubulin
posttranslational modifications regulate microtubule growth in axon regeneration. Dev.
Cell 23, 716–728
145 Oikonomou, G. and Shaham, S. (2011) The glia of Caenorhabditis elegans. Glia 59,
1253–1263
146 Lu, P., Wang, Y., Graham, L., McHale, K., Gao, M., Wu, D., Brock, J., Blesch, A.,
Rosenzweig, E., Havton, L. et al. (2012) Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural
stem cells after severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273
147 Weishaupt, N., Blesch, A. and Fouad, K. (2012) BDNF: the career of a multifaceted
neurotrophin in spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 238, 254–264
148 Uchida, K., Nakajima, H., Hirai, T., Yayama, T., Chen, K., Guerrero, A., Johnson, W. and
Baba, H. (2012) The retrograde delivery of adenovirus vector carrying the gene for
brain-derived neurotrophic factor protects neurons and oligodendrocytes from apoptosis
in the chronically compressed spinal cord of twy/twy mice. Spine 37, 2125–2135
149 He, B.-L., Ba, Y.-C., Wang, X.-Y., Liu, S.-J., Liu, G.-D., Ou, S., Gu, Y.-L., Pan, X.-H. and
Wang, T.-H. (2013) BDNF expression with functional improvement in transected spinal
cord treated with neural stem cells in adult rats. Neuropeptides 47, 1–7
150 Weishaupt, N., Li, S., Di Pardo, A., Sipione, S. and Fouad, K. (2012) Synergistic effects
of BDNF and rehabilitative training on recovery after cervical spinal cord injury. Behav.
Brain Res. 239C, 31–42
151 Lu, P., Blesch, A. and Tuszynski, M. (2001) Neurotrophism without neurotropism: BDNF
promotes survival but not growth of lesioned corticospinal neurons. J. Comp. Neurol.
436, 456–470
152 Zhang, L., Ma, Z., Smith, G., Wen, X., Pressman, Y., Wood, P. and Xu, X.-M. (2009)
GDNF-enhanced axonal regeneration and myelination following spinal cord injury is
mediated by primary effects on neurons. Glia 57, 1178–1191
153 Lu, P. and Tuszynski, M. (2008) Growth factors and combinatorial therapies for CNS
regeneration. Exp. Neurol. 209, 313–320
154 McCall, J., Weidner, N. and Blesch, A. (2012) Neurotrophic factors in combinatorial
approaches for spinal cord regeneration. Cell Tissue Res. 349, 27–37
155 Norman, L., Stroka, K. and Aranda-Espinoza, H. (2009) Guiding axons in the
central nervous system: a tissue engineering approach. Tissue Eng. Part B Rev. 15,
291–305
156 Kumamaru, H., Ohkawa, Y., Saiwai, H., Yamada, H., Kubota, K., Kobayakawa, K., Akashi,
K., Okano, H., Iwamoto, Y. and Okada, S. (2012) Direct isolation and RNA-seq reveal
environment-dependent properties of engrafted neural stem/progenitor cells. Nat.
Commun. 3, 1140
Received 3 December 2012/31 January 2013; accepted 5 February 2013
Published on the Internet 12 April 2013, doi:10.1042/BJ20121807
c© The Authors Journal compilation c© 2013 Biochemical Society
