Safety and possible outcome assessment of autologous Schwann cell and
al c
sp
FIZ
HI1
f Ne
Biol
Med
romi
ssfu
ore, many recent studies have used combination strategies for
spinal cord regeneration. Methods. We assessed the safety and feasibility of a bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cell and
is a devastating clinical condition that causes perma-
regeneration of the spinal cord (1). Cell replacement
therapy has become a promising issue that has raised
surround peripheral axons with a spirally wrapped
sive environment for axonal regeneration. It has been
well documented that endogenous SCs migrate into
Correspondence: Ali-Reza Zali, MD, Functional Neurosurgery Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Shohada Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: dr_a_zali@yahoo.com; Masoud Soleimani, PhD, Hematology Department, Faculty of Medical
dares.ac.ir; Farzad Ashrafi, MD, Neurosurgery Research Center, Department of
Cytotherapy, 2013; 15: 782e791Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: soleim_m@momuch hope in the regeneration of CNS injuries (2),
and advances in translation of experimental animal
research into clinical trials are developing.
the spinal cord after injury (3).
Many experimental and clinical studies have
suggested that the transplantation of bone marrownent disabilities and economic burden on patients and
societies. We know that compared with peripheral
nerve injuries, damage to the central nervous system
(CNS) has a low capacity for self-regeneration because
neurogenesis rarely occurs. Currently, only methyl-
prednisolone and thyrotropin-releasing hormone
have been shown to have limited effectiveness for
myelin sheath that facilitate electrical massage
transmission along the axons. In addition, these cells
can express and secrete various growth factors such
as nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, neurotrophin 3, ciliary neurotrophic factor,
glial cell lineederived neurotrophic factor and
fibroblast growth factor, thereby creating a permis-Schwann cell combination for the treatment of patients with chronic spinal cord injury. Eight subjects who received
a complete traumatic spinal cord injury (American Spinal Injury Association [ASIA] classification A) enrolled in this study.
The patients received this autologous combination of cells directly into the injury site. The mean duration of follow-up was
approximately 24 months. Results. No magnetic resonance imaging evidence of neoplastic tissue overgrowth, syringomyelia
or psuedomeningocele in any of the patients was seen during the study. There was no deterioration in sensory or motor
function in any of the patients during the course of the study. Three patients had negligible improvement in ASIA sensory
scale. No motor score improvement and no change in ASIA classification was seen. The patients had widely subjective
changes in the course of the study such as urination and defecation sensation and more stability and trunk equilibrium in the
sitting position. Conclusions. There were no adverse findings at least 2 years after autologous transplantation of Schwann cell
and mesenchymal stromal cell combination into the injured spinal cord. It appears that the use of this combination of cells is
safe for clinical application to spinal cord regeneration.
Key Words: bone marrow, cell transplantation, combination therapy, mesenchymal stromal cell, Schwann cell, spinal cord repair
Introduction
Functional recovery from spinal cord injury (SCI)
remains one of the major goals in recent decades. SCI
The Schwann cell (SC) is a major cellular
component of the peripheral nerve, which, during
development, derives from neural crest cells. Theybone marrow mesenchymal strom
treatment of patients with chronic
SAEED ORAEE YAZDANI1,2, MARYAM HA
FARZAD ASHRAFI1, AMIR-SAEED SEDDIG
1Functional Neurosurgery Research Center, Department o
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 2Stem Cell
Tehran, Iran, and 3Hematology Department, Faculty of
Abstract
Background aims. Cell replacement therapy has become a p
central nervous system injury. Evidence indicates that succe
not simply emphasize a single therapeutic strategy. TherefNeurology, Shohada Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Scie
(Received 26 October 2012; accepted 13 March 2013)
ISSN 1465-3249 Copyright  2013 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Intern
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2013.03.012ell co-transplantation for
inal cord injury
I2, ALI-REZA ZALI1, AMIR ATASHI2,
& MASOUD SOLEIMANI3
urosurgery, Shohada Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti
ogy Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center,
ical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
sing issue that has raised much hope in the regeneration of
l functional recovery in patients with spinal cord injury willnces, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: farzad.ashrafi@gmail.com
ational Society for Cellular Therapy.
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) could promote
functional improvements after SCI (4,5). In addi-
tion, MSCs can produce neuroprotective and
immunomodulatory cytokines, which rescue the
neurons from cell death after injury. These cells have
the ability to replace lost cells in the injured tissue
through differentiation into various cell types (6,7).
The safety of MSC and SC transplantation alone
in patients with SCI has been established. Many
clinical trials about the application of these cells in
such disorders have been completed or are now
Patients were fully aware of the experimental process
of the treatment, unexpected outcomes and possible
or unforeseen adverse effects such as spasticity,
neuropathic pain, autonomic dysreflexia, worsening
of motor or sensory function and infection.
Eight patients (four men and four women) were
enrolled in this study, with a mean age of 30.50 
8.15 years (range, 15e45 years). All patients who
were selected, had chronically (mean time between
the injury and the operation was 39.80  19.07
months), completed (ASIA classification A), cervical
AS
assifi
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Combination therapy for spinal cord regeneration 783ongoing. Although the results range widely, and
efficiency of these cells is controversial (8,9).
To date, it is clear that different factors, including
spreading secondary damage, neuronal and axonal
loss, scar formation and the presence of inhibitory
molecules, account for the lack of axonal regenera-
tion after SCI. As well, evidence indicates that
successful functional recovery in patients with SCI
will not simply emphasize a single therapeutic
strategy. It appears that a combination strategy will
be needed to cover the different mechanisms of
injury (10,11). Recently, studies have used combi-
nation strategies for spinal cord regeneration, and the
safety application of these approaches has been
demonstrated in animal models (12e15). Few clin-
ical studies have been conducted to assess the
possible outcome of combination therapy for the
treatment of patients with SCI (9,16,17). In this
study, we assessed safety of co-transplantation of
autologus bone marrow MSC and SC in patients
with chronic, complete, traumatic SCI.
Methods
Study design and selection criteria
This study was designed in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the
Ethics in Medical Research Committee of the Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences and Stem
Cell Technology Research Center. All procedures
were performed after written informed permission
was obtained. Written consent included procedures
of culture and analyses of biopsies from the tissue.
Table I. Demographic and clinical features of patients.
Patient Sex Age (years)
Time from SCI
(months) cl
1 M 17 49
2 F 35 13
3 F 45 15
4 F 26 51
5 F 26 59
6 M 15 21
7 M 25 23
8 M 34 63(one case) or thoracic (seven cases) lesions. Lesions
resulted from road traffic accidents in six patients,
fall from height in one patient, and diving in one
patient (Table I).
Inclusion criteria of the study were absence of
additional serious medical problems, brain disease or
psychological disturbance; absence of lower motor
neuron disease on electromyography; no compres-
sion, stenosis or tethering in the magnetic resonance
(MR) images of the spinal cord taken in the begin-
ning of the study; successful decompression or
stabilization of SCI at least >1 year before trans-
plantation; and demonstration of persistent complete
paralysis below the level of injury. Three of eight
patients had received posterior spinal fixation with
instrumentation. The remainder of the patients had
received only decompression without instrumenta-
tion. The patients were followed over the course of
approximately 2 years (mean follow-up period was
24.37  6.54 months).
Rehabilitation was considered for all patients
before surgery (at least 6 months) and after surgery
(by the end of study for each patient) as a clear,
constant and regular program that included physical
therapy strategies for encouraging motor function
below the injury site.
Preoperative and postoperative neurological
status of the patients was determined by American
Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) score (motor and
sensory), developed by the American Spinal Injury
Association according to advice presented by Inter-
national Campaign for Cure of spinal cord Paralysis
(ICCP) panel. All patients were independently
IA
cation Level of injury
Zone of partial
preservation
Follow-up
(months)
T9 T10 38
T6 T7 43
T3 T5 27
T12 L1 36
T11 T12 27
T8 T9 26
T1 T2 36
C4 C5 36
of the isolated cells was carried out by S-100
immunocytological staining. We double-checked the
cell population with P-75 immunocytological stain-
ing, which is more specific than S-100 for SCs. In
brief, after fixation of the isolated cells in 4% para-
formaldehyde (Sigma), they were permeabilized with
0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma) for intracellular antigen
staining and then blocked with 5% goat serum
(Gibco). The cells were then incubated at 4C
overnight with the anti-S100 or anti-P75 (both
from Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) antibody.
They were then incubated with appropriate fluo-
resceine-isothiocyanateeconjugated secondary anti-
body (Abcam, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA) forexamined by two trained expert clinicians, and scores
were recorded at each examination time (before
surgery and every 6 months after transplantation by
the end of study).
MR images of the patients were taken before
enrolment and also carried out to examine any changes
in the spinal cord and surrounding tissues at the 6, 12
and 18 months of follow-up after transplantation.
Electromyography (EMG) was performed in
special cases when the patients reported any changes
in motor function to differentiate voluntary muscle
contraction from reflex or involuntary spontaneous
limb movement.
Cell isolation, characterization and transplantation
Patients were hospitalized for harvesting of SCs and
MSCs; they were discharged after the procedure on
the next day and remained ambulatory before cell
transplantation surgery. Sham operations were not
considered in such a pilot safety and feasibility study.
To harvest SCs according to a modification in
the protocol that was set up previously in our labo-
ratory (18), the sural nerve of the patient (12 cm in
length), under general anesthesia, was taken from the
calf region. The specimens were placed in Dulbecco
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco, Grand
Island, NY, USA) and transferred to the cell culture
laboratory in a sealed, cold container under sterile
conditions. In the laboratory, after removal of adja-
cent soft tissue from sural nerves, tissue was sliced
into 1- to 2-mm pieces and treated with collagenase
(1.4 U/mL; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and Dis-
pase (2.4 U/mL; Sigma) for 3 h in 37C. After
elimination of collagenase by twice washing with
DMEM/F12 and mesh filtering, the cells were
incubated in DMEM/F12, not including fetal bovine
serum (FBS) for 5 d (37C, 5% CO2). After the
fasting period, the concentration of FBS (Gibco) in
culture gradually increased during the period of 1
week up to 10%. Characterization and determination
784 S. O. Yazdani et al.3 h at room temperature. At the end of process,the cells were visualized by means of a fluores-
cent microscope (TE2000-S; Nikon-Eclipse, Tokyo,
Japan) (18).
Bone marrow blood (100e150 mL) was aspirated
from the iliac bone and diluted in Hanks balanced salt
solution (HBSS, Sigma) at a ratio of 1:1. After the
samples went through a density gradient by Ficoll
(1.077 g/L, Sigma) at a ratio of 1:3, bone marrow
blood was centrifuged (400g for 40 min); the mono-
nuclear cell layer was recovered from the gradient
interface and washed with HBSS. After Ficoll was
removed, the cells were centrifuged three times with
less gradient and time to separate platelets, and
mononuclear cells were isolated. To confirm that
isolated cells were MSCs, we assessed the differenti-
ation ability of these isolated cells to adipogenic and
osteogenic cells. In addition, we analyzed surface
markers of the cells through flow cytometry. For
osteogenic induction, the growth medium was sup-
plemented with 100 nmol/L dexamethasone (Sigma),
50 mg/mL ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (Sigma) and
10 mmol/L b-glycerol phosphate (Merck, Rahway,
NY, USA) for 21 d. To signify the calcium mineral-
ization, samples were fixed and stained with Alizarin
red (Sigma) . For adipogenic differentiation, the cells
were cultured for 3 weeks in the presence of
0.5 mmol/L hydrocortisone (Sigma), 0.5 mmol/L
isobutyl methyl xanthine (Sigma) and 60 mmol/L
indomethacin (Gibco). Oil red O staining was per-
formed to confirm the accumulation of oil droplets
and adipogenic differentiation (19). A total of 1  105
cells were allocated into 2-mL microtubes with
100 mL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Sigma) for
flow cytometry analysis. The cells were stained with
monoclonal antibodies against human CD45, CD73
(all fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated), CD105
and CD90 (both PE-conjugated; all from Abcam) at
4C for 30 min. In every test, the appropriate isotype
matching the antibody was used as control to cover
nonspecific binding. Cells were then washed twice
with PBS and fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in
PBS. After fixation, flow cytometry analysis was per-
formed on FACS Calibur cytometer (Becton Dick-
inson) by means of CellQuest software. Win MDI 2.8
software was used to create the histograms (19).
All procedures were performed in a clean room
equipped with 10,000 class facilities (Bahar Clean
Room, Iran) and class 100 vertical laminar flow
cabinets (Jal, Iran).
After general anesthesia was induced, the patient
underwent intubation and was carefully placed into
the prone position. The level of operation was
determined with the use of a C-arm apparatus. After
drape and preparation, the skin incision was made on
the proposed area. Two subperiosteal partial lam-
inectomies were performed; the dura was opened in
the midline over the injured cord, and cord exposure
was attained.
In the meantime, the cell culture was washed with
HBSS and treatedwith 1mL trypsineethylenediamine
tetra-acetic acid (Sigma). The cells were examined
under an inverted microscope, and, after 5e10 min,
the remainder of trypsin was neutralized by addi-
tion of 2 mL DMEM plus 10% FBS. The cells were
then detached through subsequent pipetting and
washed twice with lactated Ringers serum and were
resuspended with PBS with concentration of 106
cells in 1 mL. Each stage was performed for the
cells (MSCs and SCs) separately. At the end of
preparation, the cells collected, and cell viability
assay with propidium iodide (PI; Sigma) was per-
formed. Briefly, PI intercalates into double-
stranded nucleic acids and is applied as an indicator
of cell viability. It can penetrate cell membranes of
dying or dead cells, but viable cells remove it. To
adjust flow cytometer settings for PI, we added
5e10 mL of PI staining solution to tubes, each
containing 1  104 cells/100 mL. After gentle
mixture and incubation for 1 min in the dark,
PI fluorescence was determined with a FACS-
canTM instrument, and data were analyzed by
Win MDI 2.8 software; results were illustrated by
Figure 1. Immunocytochemical staining of isolated human Schwann ce
control for S-100 (staining only with secondary antibody). (B) Staining
with secondary antibody). (D) Staining with P-75 antibody. Scale bar isCombination therapy for spinal cord regeneration 785Density plot diagrams (19). After that, a mixture of
isolated cells with concentration of 106 cells in 1
mL (50:50 the ratio of MSC: SC) was prepared,
and they were transplanted into the injured spinal
cord.
After the dura was opened, cells were injected into
the spinal cord at three sites throughout the damaged
cord and into the proximal and distal ends of the
intact cord with the use of an insulin syringe con-
nected to a 30.5-gauge needle by the free-hand
method over 2 min to limit cord damage under
microscopic view. Mild bulging during injection in
the site of injury confirmed the injection. The needle
was kept in place for additional 1 min in every site of
injection to prevent leakage and was withdrawn slowly
after injection. No leakage was seen during injection
and after withdrawal of the needle. The dura opening
was closed with the use of nonabsorbable sutures
(4e0 silk) and then covered with Gelfoam. A wound
drain was positioned and connected to a collection
bag. The wound was closed in anatomical layers. The
patients underwent regular postoperative care,
including vital sign recording, routine clinical labo-
ratory tests, adverse events monitoring such as
neurological decline and meningitis signs or symp-
toms, and were closely observed.
lls. Cells were stained with S-100 and P75 antibody. (A) Negative
with S-100 antibody. (C) Negative control for P-75 (staining only
500 mm.
786 S. O. Yazdani et al.Results
The cells that were harvested from the sural nerve by
means of the fasting method were positive for S-100
and P-75, which showed that isolated cells had
properties of SCs (Figure 1).
Bone marrow cells could differentiate to adipo-
genic and osteogenic cells. In addition, flow cytometry
analysis revealed that these cellswerepositive forCD73,
CD90 and CD105 and negative for CD45 (Figure 2).
Data confirmed that isolated cells were MSCs.
All the procedures were performed under sterile
conditions, and a test for sterility was carried out at
every stage of the procedure. No contamination was
detected (data not shown).
We applied the cells in second passage. Abnormal
behavior of cells such as overgrowth was not observed
in vitro. Cytogenetic analysis (karyotype) was per-
formed.Noabnormalitywasdetected (datanot shown).
Cell viability assessment was performed with the
use of PI. The results showed only 2% dead cells in
the cell population (cell viability was approximately
98%) (Figure 3).
There was no mortality in patients participated in
study. One patient (patient 6) had a hematoma and
pain at the surgery site. The hematoma had
Figure 2. Characterization of isolated human mesenchymal stromal cells
(B) osteogenic and (C) adipogenic differentiation of MSCs. (D) Determ
positive for CD 73, CD90 and CD105 and negative for CD45, which ideveloped in soft tissue and produced no neurolog-
ical deficit. At first, the hematoma was aspirated with
an angiocatheter through the two edges of the
sutured skin and later was managed conservatively.
The hematoma resolved 4 weeks after operation. No
meningitis or any infectious complication related to
the transplant procedure was detected.
Some of the worst effects on visibility of images in
three patients with instrumentation were seen (not
shown). In the remainder of the transplant recipients,
the radiological findings were unchanged, and no
MRI evidence of neoplastic tissue overgrowth,
syringomyelia or psuedomeningocele in any of the
patients was seen. The preoperative sagittal align-
ment of the spine was maintained with no new
external compression of the spinal cord (Figure 4).
All eight patients were evaluated at 6 months
before transplantation (at the beginning of rehabili-
tation program), at the time of transplantation and 6,
12 and 18 months after surgery by means of the
ASIA scale. After 6 months of rehabilitation (before
transplantation), no improvement was seen in ASIA
scale. There was no deterioration in sensory or motor
function in any of the patients during the course of
the study. There was no worsening of respiratory
. (A) Phase-contrast microscopic image of undifferentiated MSCs,
ination of cell surface antigens by flow cytometry. The cells were
s compatible with properties of MSCs.
Figure 3. Viability assay of mixture of SCs and MSCs with the use of propidium iodide (PI), before (isotype control) and after (test)
treatment with PI. PI fluorescence was determined with a FACScanTM instrument. Data revealed approximately 2% dead cells in the cell
mixture.
Figure 4. Magnetic resonance images of thoracic (patient 2) and cervical (patient 8) spinal cord before and 12 months after transplantation.
No evidence of neoplastic tissue overgrowth, syringomyelia or psuedomeningocele was seen.
Combination therapy for spinal cord regeneration 787
nspla
afte
M)
0
0
0
0
0
6 64/50 64/50 64/50
0
7function. Three patients (patients 1, 6 and 7) had
negligible improvement in ASIA sensory scale. The
changes from before transplant to 18 months after
transplant in ASIA scoring for sensory light-touch
and pin prick for patients 1, 6 and 7 were 6, 8 and 6,
respectively. No motor score improvement was seen
among the cases. One of the cases (patient 6) had
changes in motor function in which the EMG
demonstrated involuntary spontaneous movement
and no voluntary muscle contraction (data not
shown). Table II provides the estimated mean
change of patient scores on the ASIA scale. All the
patients were selected from ASIA classification A.
Overall, no improvement was observed in ASIA
classification of the patients.
The patients reported widely subjective changes
during the course of the study. Three of the patients
(patients 4, 5 and 8) (approximately 37%) had neuro-
pathic pain and received the required treatment. Two
of the patients (patients 2 and 7) reported an increase
in lower-extremity muscle spasm that required anti-
spasmodic medications. Paresthesia was reported by
patients 2 and 6, which decreased over time and dis-
appeared 6 months after operation. Before trans-
plantation, all the patients had no sphincter control or
urination anddefecation sensation.After that, patient 2
reported urinary sensation and patients 6 and 7 were
feeling defecation in addition to urination, although
none achieved sphincter control. More stability and
trunk equilibrium in the sitting position was reported
7 48/50 48/50 48/5
8 10/17 10/17 10/1Table II. Motor and sensory levels before and 24 months after tra
Patient
6 Months before
Operation (S/M)
At the time of
Operation (S/M)
6 Months
Op (S/
1 66/50 66/50 74/5
2 54/50 54/50 54/5
3 44/50 44/50 44/5
4 78/50 78/50 78/5
5 74/50 74/50 74/5
788 S. O. Yazdani et al.by five of the patients (patients 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7).
Table III shows changes in sensory, motor and
other aspects in the patients.
Discussion
Because of the varied and numerous changes in
spinal cord tissue subsequent to injury, successful
treatment for repair may involve strategies combining
neuroprotection, axonal regeneration promotion and
rehabilitation (10). Indeed the multi-faceted inhibi-
tory nature of the CNS lesion suggests that therapies
used in combination may be more effective (20).Because no practical spinal repair strategies have
yet been generally accepted, little surgery has been
undertaken to date to promote regeneration of the
human spinal cord. Clinicians and scientists in the
field of spinal cord research and medicine are poised
to begin translating promising new experimetal
finding into treatments for people (21). Cell therapy
is one of the attractive new experimental findings for
spinal cord regeneration, and many trials with the
use of this method have been performed (1).
Previously, SCs and MSCs were applied in some
trials alone, and safety application was documented
(8,9,22). MSCs have been in the spotlight of cell
therapy because of their various remarkable proper-
ties, such as lack of immunologic rejection, having
strong secretory properties and plasticity to develop
into different cell types (6,23). SCs are known to
secrete several growth factors; they can deposit
growth-promoting proteins in the extracellular
matrix and guide and myelinate axons (24,25).
We used the fasting method to harvest SCs,
according to a protocol that was set up previously in
our laboratory (18). With this method, the cells were
incubated in DMEM/F12 (not including FBS) for
5 d, and, after concentration of FBS, gradually
increased in the culture medium. In regard to
fibroblast sensitivity to glucose deprivation (26,27),
after the fasting period, most were absent from the
culture. Characterization of the isolated cells was
ntation.
r 12 Months after
Op (S/M)
18 Months after
Op (S/M)
24 Months after
Op (S/M)
70/50 70/50 70/50
54/50 54/50 54/50
44/50 44/50 44/50
78/50 78/50 78/50
74/50 74/50 74/50
64/50 70/50 70/50
52/50 52/50 52/50
10/17 10/17 10/17carried out by S-100 immunocytological staining,
and the cell population was double-checked by
means of P-75 staining. The results confirmed the
presence of SCs in culture and low probability of
fibroblast contamination. With regard to common
results, we did not stain the cells further with P0
antibody (specific antibody for SCs).
Recently, combination therapies have been
applied for spinal cord regeneration (10,11,20).
Application of two types of effective cells for spinal
cord regeneration is one of these combination
methods. In animal models, the safety of this
combination has been recognized (13,28). Although
it appears that co-transplantation of olfactory
T
ab
le
II
I.
S
um
m
ar
y
of
su
bj
ec
ti
ve
an
d
ob
je
ct
iv
e
ch
an
ge
s
in
pa
ti
en
ts
.
P
at
ie
nt
C
ha
ng
e
in
se
ns
or
y
le
ve
l
C
ha
ng
e
in
m
ot
or
le
ve
l
N
eu
ro
pa
th
ic
pa
in
P
ar
es
th
es
ia
M
us
cl
e
sp
as
m
U
ri
na
ti
on
se
ns
at
io
n
D
ef
ec
at
io
n
se
ns
at
io
n
E
qu
ili
br
iu
m
in
si
tt
in
g
po
si
ti
on
1
Y
es
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
O
N
o
Y
es
2
N
o
N
o
N
o
Y
es
Y
es
Y
es
N
o
Y
es
3
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
Y
es
4
N
o
N
o
Y
es
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
5
N
o
N
o
Y
es
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
6
Y
es
N
o
N
o
Y
es
N
o
Y
es
Y
es
Y
es
7
Y
es
N
o
N
o
N
o
Y
es
Y
es
Y
es
Y
es
8
N
o
N
o
Y
es
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
o
N
oensheathing glia and mesenchymal stromal cells does
not have synergistic effects after SCI in the rat (29),
Ban et al. (28) showed that a combination of SCs
with bone marrow MSCs is one of the best cell
strategies for repair after SCI in rats.
There were no adverse findings at least 2 years
after autologous transplantation of combination of
SCs and bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells
into the injured spinal cord. The intervening MR
imaging at the end of study showed no change from
before surgery for any evidence of tumor, cyst,
posttraumatic syringomyelia or other adverse radio-
logical findings. No evidence of medical problems
caused by cellular transplantation was reported,
which documents the safety of the use of this cell
combination.
The application of ICCP panel guidelines for
selecting patients for SCI trials in the safety phase led
to the selection of patients with complete lesions
(ASIA classification A), which are found more often
at the thoracic level (30). It recommends that phase
1 trials include randomly assigned control subjects
but that it is not essential. Indeed, the main purpose
of this study was to assess safety and possible
outcomes of SC and MSC co-transplantation for the
treatment of patients with chronic SCI. In view of
this topic and in accordance with the ICCP panel
recommendation, consideration of randomly
assigned control subjects is useful but not necessary
(31). Selection of patients with at least 20 months’
history of stable and steady-state neurological status
before cell treatment decreases the likelihood of
spontaneous recovery to a very negligible extent (32).
Although some improvement in light touch and
pinprick sensation was observed, no improvement in
ASIA classification was seen. These findings are in
accordance with the results of Yoon et al. (9), which
showed no improvement in ASIA scale in patients
with chronic spinal injuries.
In accordance with the fact that no improvement
was seen in ASIA scale after 6 months’ rehabilitation
(before transplantation), it appears that rehabilitation
cannot improve sensory and motor scores by itself in
patients with chronic spinal injuries. It does suggest
that improvements are independent of rehabilitation
programs.
Some subjective reports in relation to urinary and
defecation sensation and stability of the trunk in the
sitting position were registered. An increase in
muscle spasm, neuropathic pain and paresthesia was
reported by some patients.
Neuropathic pain is one of the serious compli-
cations after SCI. It might be related to the aberrant
regeneration of damaged axons (33). Furthermore,
some studies have reported that the cell trans-
Combination therapy for spinal cord regeneration 789plantation strategy increased the risk of neuropathic
axons. MSCs have been in the spotlight of cell therapy
790 S. O. Yazdani et al.because of their various remarkable properties, such as
lack of immunologic rejection, having strong secretory
properties and their plasticity to develop into different
cell types. With regard to the different capacities of
these cells and the different mechanisms through
which these cells make their effects, most probably
harnessing the whole potential of both of these cell
types has enough value to see if the mentioned cells
have merit to be considered as suitable candidates for
cell therapy approaches of SCIs.
This study suggests the safety of SC and MSC
combination therapy in damaged human spinal cord.
This combination caused no new deficit or adverse
effect in patients and appeared to be safe in short-
and longer-term assessments. Although limited im-
provement was seen in this safety phase for the
assessment of efficacy of this combination, controlled
trials with a large number of patients is necessary.
Conclusions
It appears that the use of an SC and MSC combi-
nation is safe for clinical application to spinal cord
regeneration. Although no significant improvement
was seen after transplantation and some degree of
spasticity and neuropathic pain was reported, study
with lager volume sizes in phase II is required to
access feasibility, efficacy and side effects of combi-
nation therapy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mahsa Babaee at Functional Neurosur-
gery Research Center for helping with manuscript
preparation, Dr Mohammad Salehi and Dr Naser
Ahmadbeygi at Stem Cell Technology Research
Center for technical advice and Dr Seyed Mahmoud
Hashemi at Stem Cell Technology Research Center
for final review and valuable comments.
Disclosure of interests: The authors have no
commercial, proprietary, or financial interest in the
products or companies described in this article.pain after surgery (34,35). In our survey, approxi-
mately 37% of patients reported neuropathic pain,
which is similar to that in the results of Yoon et al. (9)
(33% in subacute and chronic group) and Lima et al.
(36) (29%). Therefore, we could not say with
certainty that combination cell therapy increases the
risk of neuropathic pain development. Studies with
larger volume sizes in phase II are required for final
comment on this subject.
In brief, Schwann cells are known to secrete several
growth factors; deposit growth-promoting proteins in
the extracellular matrix; and guide and myelinateReferences
1. Tator CH. Review of treatment trials in human spinal cord
injury: issues, difficulties, and recommendations. Neurosur-
gery. 2006;59:957e82.
2. Fehlings MG, Vawda R. Cellular treatments for spinal cord
injury: the time is right for clinical trials. Neurotherapeutics.
2011;8:704e20.
3. Oudega M, Xu XM. Schwann cell transplantation for repair of
the adult spinal cord. J Neurotrauma. 2006;23:453e67.
4. Rossi SL, Keirstead HS. Stem cells and spinal cord regener-
ation. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2009;20:552e62.
5. Pal R, Venkataramana NK, Bansal A, Balaraju S, Jan M,
Chandra R, et al. Ex vivo-expanded autologous bone marrow-
derived mesenchymal stromal cells in human spinal cord
injury/paraplegia: a pilot clinical study. Cytotherapy. 2009;11:
897e911.
6. Caplan A. Adult mesenchymal stem cells for tissue engi-
neering versus regenerative medicine. J Cell Physiol. 2007;
213:341e7.
7. Ruff CA, Wilcox JT, Fehlings MG. Cell-based transplantation
strategies to promote plasticity following spinal cord injury.
Exp Neurol. 2012;235:78e90.
8. Saberi H, Moshayedi P, Aghayan H, Arjmand B, Hosseini S,
Emami-Razavi S, et al. Treatment of chronic thoracic spinal
cord injury patients with autologous Schwann cell trans-
plantation: an interim report on safety considerations and
possible outcomes. Neurosci Lett. 2008;443:46e50.
9. Yoon S, Shim Y, Park Y, Chung J, Nam J, Kim M, et al.
Complete spinal cord injury treatment using autologous bone
marrow cell transplantation and bone marrow stimulation with
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor: phase I/II
clinical trial. Stem Cells. 2007;25:2066e73.
10. Bunge MB. Novel combination strategies to repair the injured
mammalian spinal cord. Journal Spinal Cord Med. 2008;31:
262.
11. Rosner J, Avalos P, Acosta F, Liu J, Drazin D. The potential
for cellular therapy combined with growth factors in spinal
cord injury. Stem Cells Int. 2012;2012:826754. doi:10.1155/
2012/826754.
12. Houle JD, Tom VJ, Mayes D, Wagoner G, Phillips N, Silver J.
Combining an autologous peripheral nervous system “bridge”
and matrix modification by chondroitinase allows robust,
functional regeneration beyond a hemisection lesion of the
adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci. 2006;26:7405.
13. Pearse D, Sanchez A, Pereira F, Andrade C, Puzis R,
Pressman Y, et al. Transplantation of Schwann cells and/or
olfactory ensheathing glia into the contused spinal cord:
survival, migration, axon association, and functional recovery.
Glia. 2007;55:976e1000.
14. Johnson PJ, Tatara A, Shiu A, Sakiyama-Elbert SE.
Controlled release of neurotrophin-3 and platelet derived
growth factor from fibrin scaffolds containing neural progen-
itor cells enhances survival and differentiation into neurons in
a subacute model of SCI. Cell Transplant. 2010;19:89.
15. Park SS, Lee YJ, Lee SH, Lee D, Choi K, Kim WH, et al.
Functional recovery after spinal cord injury in dogs treated
with a combination of Matrigel and neural-induced adipose-
derived mesenchymal stem cells. Cytotherapy. 2012;14:
584e97.
16. Ichim TE, Solano F, Lara F, Paris E, Ugalde F,
Rodriguez JP, et al. Feasibility of combination allogeneic stem
cell therapy for spinal cord injury: a case report. Int Arch
Med. 2010;3:30.
17. Moviglia G, Fernandez Vina R, Brizuela J, Saslavsky J,
Vrsalovic F, Varela G, et al. Combined protocol of cell therapy
for chronic spinal cord injury: report on the electrical and
functional recovery of two patients. Cytotherapy. 2006;8:
202e9.
18. Yazdani SO, Golestaneh AF, Shafiee A, Hafizi M,
Omrani HA, Soleimani M. Effects of low level laser therapy
on proliferation and neurotrophic factor gene expression of
human schwann cells in vitro. J Photochem Photobiol B.
2012;107:9e13.
19. Hafizi M, Bakhshandeh B, Soleimani M, Atashi A. Exploring
the enkephalinergic differentiation potential in adult stem cells
for cell therapy and drug screening implications. In Vitro
Cellular Dev Biol-Anim. 2012;48:562e9.
20. McCreedy DA, Sakiyama-Elbert SE. Combination therapies
in the CNS: engineering the environment. Neurosci Lett.
2012;519:115e21.
21. Amador MJ, Guest JD. An appraisal of ongoing experimental
procedures in human spinal cord injury. J Neurol Phys Ther.
2005;29:70e86.
22. Bhanot Y, Rao S, Ghosh D, Balaraju S, Radhika CR, Satish
Kumar KV. Autologous mesenchymal stem cells in chronic
spinal cord injury. Br J Neurosurg. 2011;25:516e22.
23. Hernandeza J, Torres-Espina A, Navarro X. Adult stem cell
transplants for spinal cord injury repair: current state in
preclinical research. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011;6:
273e87.
24. Schaal SM, Kitay BM, Cho KS, Lo TP Jr, Barakat DJ,
Marcillo AE, et al. Schwann cell transplantation improves
reticulospinal axon growth and forelimb strength after severe
28. Ban DX, Ning GZ, Feng SQ, Wang Y, Zhou XH, Liu Y, et al.
Combination of activated Schwann cells with bone mesen-
chymal stem cells: the best cell strategy for repair after spinal
cord injury in rats. Regen Med. 2011;6:707e20.
29. Amemori T, Jendelová P, Ruzicková K, Arboleda D, Syková E.
Co-transplantation of olfactory ensheathing glia and mesen-
chymal stromal cells does not have synergistic effects after
spinal cord injury in the rat. Cytotherapy. 2010;12:212e25.
30. Tuszynski M, Steeves J, Fawcett J, Lammertse D,
Kalichman M, Rask C, et al. Guidelines for the conduct of
clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed by the ICCP
panel: clinical trial inclusion/exclusion criteria and ethics.
Spinal Cord. 2006;45:222e31.
31. Lammertse D, Tuszynski M, Steeves J, Curt A, Fawcett J,
Rask C, et al. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for
spinal cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel: clinical
trial design. Spinal Cord. 2006;45:232e42.
32. Fawcett J, Curt A, Steeves J, Coleman W, Tuszynski M,
Lammertse D, et al. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical
trials for spinal cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel:
spontaneous recovery after spinal cord injury and statistical
power needed for therapeutic clinical trials. Spinal Cord.
2006;45:190e205.
33. Kishk NA, Gabr H, Hamdy S, Afifi L, Abokresha N,
MahmoudH, et al. Case control series of intrathecal autologous
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell therapy for chronic spinal
cord injury. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2010;24:702e8.
Combination therapy for spinal cord regeneration 791cervical spinal cord contusion. Cell Transplant. 2007;16:
207e28.
25. Barakat DJ, Gaglani SM, Neravetla SR, Sanchez AR,
Andrade CM, Pressman Y, et al. Survival, integration, and
axon growth support of glia transplanted into the chronically
contused spinal cord. Cell Transplant. 2005;14:225e40.
26. Cechowska-Pasko M, Sura_zynski A, Bankowski E. The effect
of glucose deprivation on collagen synthesis in fibroblast
cultures. Mol Cell Biochem. 2009;327:211e8.
27. Cechowska-Pasko M, Bankowski E. Glucose deficiency
inhibits glycosaminoglycans synthesis in fibroblast cultures.
Biochimie. 2010;92:806e13.34. Macias MY, Syring MB, Pizzi MA, Crowe MJ, Alexanian AR,
Kurpad SN. Pain with no gain: allodynia following neural
stem cell transplantation in spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol.
2006;201:335e48.
35. Hofstetter CP, Holmstrom NA, Lilja JA, Schweinhardt P,
Hao J, Spenger C, et al. Allodynia limits the usefulness of
intraspinal neural stem cell grafts; directed differentiation
improves outcome. Nat Neurosci. 2005;8:346e53.
36. Lima C, Pratas-Vital J, Escada P, Hasse-Ferreira A,
Capucho C, Peduzzi JD. Olfactory mucosa autografts in
human spinal cord injury: a pilot clinical study. J Spinal Cord
Med. 2006;29:191e203.
