Neurosci Bull    August 1, 2013, 29(4): 399–401. http://www.neurosci.cn
DOI: 10.1007/s12264-013-1366-3 399
·Editorial·
An update on spinal cord injury research
Yimin Zou*
Neurobiology Section, Biological Sciences Division, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
*Guest Editor of the Special Issue, Associate Editor. E-mail: yzou@ucsd.edu
© Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, CAS and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is an ever-increasing challenge. 
Severe injury can cause long-term loss of sensory and 
motor functions, as well as other chronic conditions, such 
as neuropathic pain and autonomic dysreflexia. So far, 
most research has been focused on acute injury.  However, 
due to the lack of treatment, more and more individuals 
with this condition enter a chronic state, to which very little 
research effort has been dedicated. 
SCI is a complex condition. It involves damage to 
axons, death of neurons, neuroinflammation, glial scar 
formation, loss of myelin, and lack of remyelination. It is 
clear that effective treatment will require combinatorial 
approaches. The 12 invited articles for this special issue 
on SCI provide an update on many of these areas of SCI 
research. Here, I highlight the articles and reviews by 
theme.
Severe SCI involves severing of axons, breaking 
ascending and descending connections. Inhibitory 
molecules in the environment of the adult central nervous 
system, such as the myelin-associated inhibitors and 
proteoglycans in glial scars, were thought to be the 
major cause of the lack of regeneration for many years[1]. 
However, efforts to regenerate axons across a lesion 
site in the mammalian spinal cord by overcoming this 
inhibition have not been successful. In some cases, axon 
regeneration into cell grafts can be achieved, as in studies 
using preconditioning lesion paradigms of sensory axons[2]. 
But few axons project beyond the lesion and reach long-
range targets. In recent years, more attention has been 
shifted to enhancing the intrinsic growth capacity of 
adult central nervous system axons. Deletion of pTEN 
(phosphatase and tensin homolog) induces unprecedented 
regeneration across the fully-transacted spinal cord[3]. 
Neurons derived from embryos or induced pluripotent 
stem cells that have strong intrinsic growth properties can 
ignore inhibitory cues in the adult spinal cord and grow long 
distances up and down the cord[4]. In partial injury, rerouting 
and sprouting of axons result in circuit reorganization in 
the spared tissue and have been shown to be effective in 
restoring function using a combination of pharmacological 
and electrophysiological stimulation and robot-assisted 
rehabilitation techniques[5,6].
Molecular mechanisms that promote or inhibit axon 
growth have been studied, using various injury paradigms, 
in different neuronal types and species. Some species 
have poor central regeneration, whereas others have the 
capacity to regenerate. Axons in the peripheral nervous 
system of mammals also show extensive regeneration. The 
review by Martin Oudega of the University of Pittsburgh[7] 
provides a comprehensive discussion comparing the 
molecular mechanisms found in mammals and zebrafish. 
These comparisons allow for a better understanding of 
the underlying principles. Remarkably, regeneration in the 
zebrafish central nervous system is also incomplete. Some 
axon tracts can regenerate but others cannot. This makes 
zebrafish an interesting model system for SCI research 
along with the traditional mammalian models such as rats 
and mice. Feng-Quan Zhou of Johns Hopkins Medical 
School[8] discusses signaling mechanisms that lead to 
axon regeneration in the mammalian peripheral nervous 
system, in Drosophila and in Caenorhabditis elegans. Jeff 
Twiss of the University of South Carolina[9] contributes 
an original paper reporting that protein translation 
machinery is present in the peripheral branches of the 
axons of mammalian dorsal root ganglion cells, which can 
regenerate, suggesting that the capacity of local protein 
thesis is essential for regeneration. 
The glial scar presents strong inhibitory cues for 
Neurosci Bull     August 1, 2013, 29(4): 399–401400
regeneration, an influence yet to be overcome. At the same 
time, the glial scar provides a barrier against inflammation 
to limit secondary injury, and this is beneficial[10,11]. Cheng 
He of the Second Military Medical University (Shanghai)[12] 
discusses the complex role of the glial scar in influencing 
axon regeneration and neuroinflammation. The choice 
of appropriate experimental systems and species for 
SCI research is crucial. Jae Lee of the University of 
Miami[13] provides a comprehensive discussion of different 
experimental systems for SCI, animal species, and lesion 
paradigms.
Injury can cause neuronal loss. So keeping neurons 
alive is of high priority. Gong Ju of the Fourth Military 
Medical University (Xi’an)[14] contributes an original research 
article on the role of Batroxobin in protecting neurons, 
which may have therapeutic potential. Qiang Liu of the 
First Clinical Medical College of Shanxi Medical University 
(Taiyuan)[15] reports that valproate reduces autophagy and 
promotes neuroprotection.
Improvement of locomotor function has been attributed 
to axons that regenerate across the lesion site. Wutian Wu 
of the University of Hong Kong[16] contributes an original 
research article showing that sometimes such functional 
improvement may be unrelated to the regeneration of 
these particular axons. He proposes that adaptation of 
neural circuits in the spinal cord below the transection site 
may contribute to improved function, suggesting that the 
circuitry in the spared tissue has adaptive potential that has 
not been adequately appreciated.
Jean-Marie Cabelguen of the University of Bordeaux[17] 
summarizes insights from studies of lower vertebrates that 
have extensive capacity for regeneration and functional 
recovery in the central nervous system. However, even in 
the salamander, regeneration is imperfect. The number of 
axons achieving correct innervation is less than normal and 
regenerated axons can innervate inappropriate targets in 
transected animals. Interestingly, neither new brainstem 
neurons (neurogenesis) nor axon collaterals from 
unlesioned neurons (sprouting) contribute to the restoration 
of descending projections after spinal cord transection in 
salamanders, fish, and larval lampreys. This suggests that 
plasticity is limited. In turtles, even when regeneration of 
axons does occur, functional recovery is incomplete (limited 
to stepping). This suggests that even if we achieve massive 
regeneration of central nervous system axons in mammals, 
we may still face the issues of the extent of regrowth and 
correct targeting for functional recovery, which require a 
better understanding of the mechanisms of axon growth 
and guidance. In the completely transected fish and cat, 
daily training can result in functional recovery, suggesting 
that sensory afferents play crucial roles in reactivating the 
locomotor central pattern generator. This is potentially 
consistent with the findings reported by Wutian Wu[16] in this 
issue.
Studies in some areas of SCI research have entered 
the phase of therapeutic development. James Fawcett of 
the University of Cambridge[18] summarizes work centered 
around combinatorial treatment with Chondrotinase ABC 
and other approaches to achieve regeneration based on 
progress in molecular signaling in glial scar inhibition. Riyi 
Shi of Purdue University[19] discusses an interesting tissue-
engineering approach using polyethylene glycol, which 
reseals membrane and repairs mitochondria to reduce 
oxidative stress and minimize secondary injury. Agnes 
Haggerty of the University of Pittsburgh[20] covers promising 
biomaterials for the repair of damaged spinal cord. These 
exciting efforts will help accelerate translational research in 
SCI.
The success of SCI repair depends on multidisciplinary 
approaches that address multiple aspects of injury 
responses. More robust axon regeneration with proper 
guidance and synapse specif icity are the ult imate 
goals for restoring maximal function. This will probably 
most effectively be done in combination with functional 
rehabilitation. Effective neuroprotective agents will enhance 
success in the long-term and should be included in the 
care package. Better understanding of the neural circuit 
functions controlling sensory-motor behaviors will provide 
more sophisticated molecular and rehabilitation designs. 
Using proper animal models for preclinical studies will 
also help identify promising therapies. A more severe and 
rapidly growing condition, traumatic brain injury, poses 
ever-increasing challenges. Even less is known about 
traumatic brain injury. It is conceivable that these two areas 
of research will have more and more interactions in the 
future.
REFERENCES
[1] Yiu G, He Z. Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration. Nat 
Yimin Zou.    An update on spinal cord injury research 401
Rev Neurosci 2006, 7: 617–627.
[2] Hollis ER 2nd, Zou Y. Reinduced Wnt signaling limits 
regenerative potential of sensory axons in the spinal cord 
following conditioning lesion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012, 
109: 14663–14668.
[3] Park KK, Liu K, Hu Y, Kanter JL, He Z. PTEN/mTOR and 
axon regeneration. Exp Neurol 2010, 223: 45–50.
[4] Lu P, Wang Y, Graham L, McHale K, Gao M, Wu D, et al. 
Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells 
after severe spinal cord injury. Cell 2012, 150: 1264–1273.
[5] Courtine G, Song B, Roy RR, Zhong H, Herrmann JE, Ao Y, 
et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect 
propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat 
Med 2008, 14: 69–74.
[6] van den Brand R, Heutschi J, Barraud Q, DiGiovanna J, 
Bartholdi K, Huerlimann M, et al. Restoring voluntary control 
of locomotion after paralyzing spinal cord injury. Science 
2012, 336: 1182–1185.
[7] Vajn K, Plunkett JA, Tapanes-Castillo A, Oudega M. Axonal 
regeneration after spinal cord injury in zebrafish and 
mammals: differences, similarities, translation. Neurosci Bull 
2013, 29: 402–410.
[8] Saijilafu, Zhang BY, Zhou FQ. Signaling pathways that 
regulate axon regeneration. Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 411–420.
[9] Merianda T, Twiss J. Peripheral nerve axons contain 
machinery for co-translational secretion of axonally-
generated proteins. Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 493–500.
[10] Sofroniew MV. Reactive astrocytes in neural repair and 
protection. Neuroscientist 2005, 11: 400–407.
[11] Voskuhl RR, Peterson RS, Song B, Ao Y, Morales LB, 
Tiwari-Woodruff S, et al. Reactive astrocytes form scar-like 
perivascular barriers to leukocytes during adaptive immune 
inflammation of the CNS. J Neurosci 2009, 29: 11511–11522.
[12] Yuan YM, He C. The glial scar in spinal cord injury and repair. 
Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 421–435.
[13] Lee DH, Lee JK. Animal models of axon regeneration after 
spinal cord injury. Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 436–444.
[14] Fan H, Liu X, Tang HB, Xiao P, Wang YZ, Ju G. Protective 
effects of Batroxobin on spinal cord injury in rats. Neurosci 
Bull 2013, 29: 501–508.
[15] Hao HH, Wang L, Guo ZJ, Bai L, Zhang RP, Shuang WB, et 
al. Valproic acid reduces autophagy and promotes functional 
recovery after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurosci Bull 2013, 
29: 484–492.
[16] Yuan Q, Su H,  Chiu K,  Wu W, Lin ZX. Contrast ing 
neuropathology and functional recovery after spinal cord 
injury in developing and adult rats. Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 
509–516.
[17] Cabelguen JM, Chevallier S, Amontieva-Potapova I, Philippe 
C. Anatomical and electrophysiological plasticity of locomotor 
networks following spinal transection in the salamander. 
Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 467–476.
[18] Zhao RR, Fawcett JW. Combination treatment with 
chondroitinase ABC in spinal cord injury–breaking the barrier. 
Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 477–483.
[19] Shi R. Polyethylene glycol repairs membrane damage and 
enhances functional recovery: a tissue engineering approach 
to spinal cord injury. Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 460–466.
[20] Haggerty AE, Oudega M. Biomaterials for spinal cord repair. 
Neurosci Bull 2013, 29: 445–459.
