Neurosci Bull    August 1, 2013, 29(4): 436–444. http://www.neurosci.cn
Doi: 10.1007/s12264-013-1365-4436
·Review·
Animal models of axon regeneration after spinal cord injury
Do-Hun Lee, Jae K. Lee
University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Department of Neurological Surgery, Miami, FL 
33136, USA
Corresponding author: Jae K. Lee. E-mail: JLee22@med.miami.edu
© Shanghai institutes for Biological Sciences, CAS and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
With advances in genetic and imaging techniques, investigating axon regeneration after spinal cord injury 
in vivo is becoming more common in the literature. However, there are many issues to consider when using 
animal models of axon regeneration, including species, strains and injury models. No single particular model 
suits all types of experiments and each hypothesis being tested requires careful selection of the appropriate 
animal model. in this review, we describe several commonly-used animal models of axon regeneration in the 
spinal cord and discuss their advantages and disadvantages.
Keywords: pyramidotomy; strain differences; contusion; injury models
Introduction
There is a fundamental difference between studying axon 
regeneration and other research areas. Unlike development, 
cancer, or many neurodegenerative diseases, axon 
regeneration is a process that does not typically occur in the 
adult mammalian central nervous system (CNS). Therefore, 
in addition to investigating the basic cellular and molecular 
processes that promote axon regeneration, the investigator 
must also have a keen understanding of how to detect 
regenerating axons since this is a major endpoint of the study. 
First, an operational definition of what constitutes an axon that 
has regenerated is needed. Does regeneration refer to any 
type or a specific type of axonal growth? This topic has been 
discussed many times[1-3], and is not the focus of this review. 
Rather, we introduce some of the popular in vivo models of 
axon regeneration that are used to help investigators gain a 
better understanding of the pros and cons of each model.
Rats versus Mice
Most of the earlier studies on spinal cord injury (SCi) and 
axon regeneration were performed in rats. However, with 
advances in genetic mouse models and their increased 
availability to the research community, these models have 
gained much popularity recently. Using mice with knockout 
of a target molecule has become the gold-standard for 
functional testing, and Cre-Lox technology along with 
increasing numbers of transgenic mice have provided 
greater temporo-spatial control of the knockout strategy 
that has proven invaluable for providing mechanistic 
insights into the cellular and molecular processes of axon 
regeneration. Therefore, many scientists have been drawn 
to using mice to study axon regeneration, but certain 
limitations must be considered.
one important difference between rat and mouse 
models of SCi is that while rats develop large fluid-filled 
cystic cavities at the injury site (thereby mimicking the 
human pathology), mice do not[4]. instead, the injury site in 
mice is densely packed with cells and actually decreases 
in size over time[4]. The exact reason for such a significant 
pathological difference between such closely-related 
species is not known. Since axons do not regenerate 
regardless of the presence or the absence of a cavity, the 
lack of a cavity in mice may not matter in most instances. 
However, if the focus is on targeting cells present at the 
injury site, such as the cellular composition of the scar, 
then the findings of the study must be interpreted with this 
difference in mind. in addition, transplantation strategies 
(and findings) may be significantly different between rats 
(that have a cyst) and mice (that do not have a cyst). 
Do-Hun Lee, et al.    Animal models of axon regeneration after SCi 437
Therefore, rats are preferable for studies where mimicking 
the human pathology is important. These include preclinical 
studies that focus on the efficacy of novel cellular and/or 
pharmacological therapies. However, to gain mechanistic 
insights into the basic cellular and molecular biology of SCi, 
mouse models may have more to offer.
Another important factor to consider when using mouse 
models is strain differences. That different strains respond 
differently to SCi is now well-described in the literature. 
After contusive SCi, different strains display different 
rates of locomotor recovery[5] and histopathology[6-8]. 
interestingly, the C57BL/6 mouse, which is perhaps the 
most commonly used strain in axon regeneration studies, 
has been reported to have a worse locomotor outcome[5], 
the greatest immunological response[6], and the least 
axonal growth[7] compared to other inbred mouse strains. 
in fact, adult dorsal root ganglia cultures from 129X/
SvJ mice show much more axon growth than those from 
C57BL/6 mice[9]. in addition, the same genetic deletion of 
the myelin-associated inhibitor, Nogo-A, shows much more 
axonal growth in a 129X1/SvJ background than a C57BL/6 
background[9]. While there is no clear consensus about 
which genetic background is ideal for axon regeneration 
studies, it is clear that the backgrounds of experimental and 
control groups should be well-matched.
Matching genetic background is possible with inbred 
mice after many generations of backcrossing. Since 
this can significantly delay research progress, some 
studies have used mixed backgrounds. However, when 
the targeted allele is present in a mixed background, the 
genetic differences between mutant and wild-type animals 
is not as clear as a pure background, leading to a spectrum 
of phenotypes which may increase the variability in the 
outcome measures[10]. With a single mutation, this issue can 
be addressed by using littermate controls; a homozygous 
mutant mouse is bred to a heterozygous mouse to produce 
offspring that are either mutants or heterozygotes, which 
can be used as littermate controls that should have 
the same genetic background. However, this strategy 
becomes impractical when the experiment involves 
compound mutants (i.e. two or more genetic deletions). 
An alternative strategy is to establish a new founder line(s) 
using compound heterozygotes to generate the wild-type, 
single and/or compound mutants necessary for the study. 
Then these mutant (and wild-type) mice can be used to 
establish a breeding colony that will generate the animals 
to be used in the study. As long as the breeding scheme is 
isolated from other genetic backgrounds and genetic drift 
is avoided, this strategy should provide a similar (but not 
identical) background between the different groups.
Large Animal Models
While the focus of this review is on rodent models of SCi, 
we briefly discuss the utility of large animal models such 
as cats, pigs and non-human primates. These models 
are not as commonly used as rodents for several reasons 
including size, cost, availability, housing facilities, medical 
care and ethics. However, they have provided valuable 
information on our understanding of SCi pathophysiology 
and have served as important preclinical models for testing 
new therapies. Cats have been a popular model for spinal 
cord electrophysiologists and have been used for decades 
to decipher the physiology of the normal and injured spinal 
cords[11, 12]. Due to their large size and greater similarity 
to human physiology, pig models are becoming more 
important as a preclinical model that is intermediate in size 
between rodents and humans[13, 14]. There is obvious utility 
in using non-human primates as a preclinical model (e.g. 
bipedal locomotion), but ethical reasons typically limit their 
use in the SCI field. Even with this limited use, non-human 
primate models have provided important information on 
anatomical plasticity[15] and behavior[16, 17], and have been 
instrumental in advances in brain-machine-interface 
devices[18]. Therefore, while the rodent is still the popular 
model among basic scientists, large animal models remain 
a necessity for finding effective therapies for SCI.
Penetrating Lesions
Dorsal Hemisection
The dorsal hemisection model (Fig. 1A) has become 
the model-of-choice for investigating regeneration of 
corticospinal tract (CST) axons. in this model, the top 
one-half to two-thirds of the spinal cord is cut usually at 
the thoracic level, which injures the descending CST and 
rubrospinal tract (RST) axons as well as the ascending 
sensory axons in the dorsal columns[19]. Thus, in a typical 
experiment, the spinal cord lesion is followed by injections 
of anterograde tracers (e.g. biotinylated dextran amine) into 
Neurosci Bull     August 1, 2013, 29(4): 436–444438
the motor cortex (for the CST) or the red nucleus (for the 
RST). Ascending sensory axons are typically studied using 
a dorsal column lesion as described below. if performed 
correctly in mice, there should be virtually no detectable 
traced CST/RST axons caudal to the injury site under 
normal circumstances. This can be confirmed by observing 
cross-sections of the caudal spinal cord. The presence of 
significant numbers of traced axons caudal to the injury 
site in control animals confounds the interpretation of 
increased numbers of axons in the experimental animals; 
the increased number could be due to frank regeneration 
of severed axons that have extended down the spinal cord 
and/or more spared axons that display increased growth.
Another important difference between rats and mice is 
the detection of the ventral CST using conventional tracing 
methods. injection of anterograde tracers into the motor 
cortex in rats labels the dorsal CST axons (the main tract in 
the dorsal column and the minor tract in the dorsolateral 
white matter) as well as the ventral CST axons located in 
the ventromedial white matter[20, 21]. However, for unknown 
reasons, the ventral CST is rarely labeled in mice[22] even 
though genetic labeling studies clearly demonstrate their 
presence[23]. Therefore, a dorsal hemisection in mice results 
in the caudal spinal cord being virtually devoid of any traced 
CST axons, whereas a similar experimental approach in 
rats displays many CST axons in the caudal spinal cord. 
Under these circumstances, a therapeutic treatment in mice 
that leads to increased CST axons caudal to the lesion may 
be interpreted as enhanced axon regeneration, whereas 
similar results in rats could be due to any kind of axonal 
growth.
Complete Transection
A complete transection of the spinal cord (Fig. 1B) is the 
most severe type of injury and can be considered as the 
Fig. 1. Diagram of different mid-thoracic penetrating SCI lesions. Coronal and sagittal views of the injury site after dorsal hemisection (A), 
complete transection (B) and a dorsal column lesion (C). After tracers (red) are injected into the cortex (for dorsal hemisection and 
complete transection) or into the peripheral nerve (for dorsal column lesion), the traced axons typically fail to regenerate across 
the lesion and are absent from the other side of the spinal cord. Green denotes spared axons that are not labeled by the tracer and 
intentionally left intact. 
Do-Hun Lee, et al.    Animal models of axon regeneration after SCi 439
most rigorous test of axon regeneration since the two 
stumps of the spinal cord are completely separated and no 
axons are spared. However, under such harsh conditions, 
the scar tissue may be too much of an inhibitory barrier for 
axons that may otherwise be able to regenerate across 
healthier tissue that is left after partial injuries. This is an 
advantage of the dorsal hemisection model described 
above where a bridge of non-lesioned tissue remains in the 
ventral white matter that may serve as a more preferable 
substrate for axon growth than the glial scar. Complete 
transections are necessary for studying axons that are 
distributed throughout the spinal cord, such as serotonin 
axons.
Dorsal Column Lesion
Dorsal column lesions (Fig. 1C) typically involve either a cut 
or a crush of the ascending sensory axons located in the 
dorsal part of the dorsal columns. Since this tract is located 
at the dorsal surface of the cord, it is easily accessible 
and can be lesioned without significantly affecting other 
axonal pathways. These axons can be labeled by injecting 
retrograde transganglionic tracers (such as cholera toxin 
beta) into the peripheral nerve or into the associated 
muscle. Alternatively, tracer can be injected directly into 
the dorsal root ganglia, although this may cause some 
damage and likely leads to a conditioning lesion response 
as described below.
The dorsal column sensory axons offer a unique model 
system in that their cell bodies, the dorsal root ganglia, have 
a peripheral branch as well as a central branch stemming 
from the same soma. interestingly, the peripheral branch 
can regenerate, while the intraspinal central branch of the 
same neuron cannot. This supports the theory that the 
failure of regeneration in the CNS is due, at least in part, to 
the inhibitory (non-growth-permissive) nature of the CNS. 
Moreover, a lesion of the peripheral nerve prior to a lesion 
of the corresponding central axons can promote a limited 
degree of regeneration of the central axons[24], indicating 
that the peripheral lesion enhances the intrinsic state of 
growth that enables the central branch to regenerate. This 
“conditioning lesion” paradigm has served as a model 
system to study regeneration-associated mechanisms 
such as the expression of growth-associated genes[25-28]. 
However, the exact mechanism behind conditioning lesions 
remains poorly understood.
Contusion
The contusion model of SCi (Fig. 2) is the preferred 
model for mimicking the pathophysiology that occurs most 
commonly in humans. Although there are various contusion 
models for rats and mice[29-34], the basic principle is to use 
an injury device to deliver a force that can be adjusted to 
control the contusion severity. The mechanical force that 
generates this type of injury leads to a lesion morphology 
that is very different from penetrating injuries such as those 
described above. in addition to the dura remaining intact, 
contusion results in a lesion that is typically larger than a 
penetrating injury and leaves a peripheral rim of spared 
white matter[35]. By design, lesions in penetrating injuries 
are typically limited to the target areas without significant 
damage to adjacent areas as occurs in contusive injuries. 
Because of their clinical relevance, most behavioral assays 
are based on contusive models that have become the gold-
standard for pre-clinical trials of therapeutic agents after 
SCi. 
While contusion injuries are useful for understanding 
the pathophysiology of SCi, they have some disadvantages 
in the study of axon regeneration. Since the biomechanical 
force of the injury can vary and is more difficult to 
predict than manual lesions, it is difficult to control which 
axons are severed and which are spared. For example, 
when performed correctly, a dorsal hemisection in mice 
eliminates virtually all CST axons in the caudal spinal cord. 
However, contusion injuries usually spare the dorsolateral 
CST, which could be misinterpreted as regeneration. This is 
also true of serotonin axons that are distributed throughout 
the entire spinal cord; while a complete transection is 
guaranteed to lesion all descending serotonin axons, even 
severe contusive injuries typically display serotonin axons 
in the caudal cord (personal observations).
one case where contusion injuries can be used to 
study axon regeneration is in attempts to observe axons 
in the actual lesion site (a region devoid of astrocytes 
sometimes called the GFAP-negative region) or in tissue 
that has been transplanted into the lesion site[36-39]. Since 
most axons fail to grow into the lesion, experimental 
manipulations that lead to axons being detected in the 
lesion can be interpreted as having caused regeneration. 
This is possible in mice since the lesion is filled with cells 
that can serve as a substrate, but not the case in rats where 
Neurosci Bull     August 1, 2013, 29(4): 436–444440
a fluid-filled cyst develops. However, in rats, transplants 
that promote the growth of axons into the transplant can 
be interpreted as axon regeneration since the original 
transplant was devoid of axons. of course, this criterion 
also applies to any injury model involving transplants.
Pyramidotomy
Pyramidotomy (Fig. 3) involves lesion of the CST (typically 
unilaterally) at the level of the pyramidal tract located 
at the ventral surface of the brainstem. Unlike the SCi 
models described above, a pyramidotomy does not 
lesion the spinal cord and therefore has limited utility for 
understanding SCi pathophysiology. However, as a CST-
selective lesion, this model has been used extensively for 
understanding the contribution of CST axons to forelimb 
movements[40, 41] and as a model for promoting CST axonal 
growth[42-45]. After a unilateral pyramidotomy, one side of the 
spinal cord (contralateral to the lesion since the lesion is 
made before the pyramidal decussation) is virtually devoid 
of CST innervation while the other side is not significantly 
affected since CST axons in rodents typically do not 
innervate the spinal cord bilaterally to a significant degree. 
The intact CST is labeled with a tracer and the growth of 
these axons across the midline is observed at a specified 
time after injury. Since only the intact axons are labeled, 
this is a model to study purely axonal sprouting rather than 
bona fide regeneration. The completeness of the lesion can 
be verified by PKCγ immunohistochemistry of spinal cross-
sections, which show much more robust immunostaining in 
the intact main CST[41, 42, 44, 45]. 
one unique feature of the pyramidotomy model is 
the absence of a significant glial scar, which is typically 
observed after SCi. While there is reported evidence of 
some microglial activation[46], pyramidotomy does not lead 
to the significant glial scar that typically forms after CNS 
injury. This can be advantageous because the glial scar 
does not serve as an inhibitory barrier to axonal growth 
in the pyramidotomy model, increasing the likelihood of 
observing a positive effect by the experimental treatment. 
Fig. 2. Diagram of a mid-thoracic contusion injury. A contusion injury is typically induced by a device that impacts the surface of the 
spinal cord with a predetermined force. This results in a pathology where a peripheral rim of white matter is spared. In many 
instances, corticospinal axons are partially spared as denoted by the red axons caudal to the injury site.
Do-Hun Lee, et al.    Animal models of axon regeneration after SCi 441
on the contrary, lack of axonal growth in a spinal cord 
injury model can be attributed to either the presence of 
the inhibitory glial scar or the lack of an intrinsic growth 
mechanism. Therefore, the pyramidotomy model offers a 
simpler experimental model to specifically manipulate CST 
axons while reducing the likelihood of producing false-
negatives.
In vivo Imaging
The most definitive way of verifying whether an axon has 
regenerated or not is to document the process while it is 
happening. Live images of an axon re-growing from its 
injured tip are irrefutable evidence of axon regeneration. 
But this is technically very difficult and only recently 
have there been the tools necessary to make significant 
advances in this field. In vivo imaging of single axons in 
the spinal cord requires animal models with appropriate 
fluorescent labeling. A popular choice has been to use 
transgenic mouse lines developed by Feng et al.[47] in 
which different fluorescent markers are expressed under 
the Thy1 promoter in specific subsets of neurons. Using 
the GFP-S line of these transgenic mice, Kerschensteiner 
et al.[48] were the first to describe the response of lesioned 
ascending dorsal sensory axons through repetitive imaging 
in vivo. Using a thin needle to sever the axons, they 
discovered that after a period of acute degeneration of both 
the proximal and distal tips, the proximal axons often grew 
in the wrong direction. Therefore, it seems that ascending 
sensory axons fail to regenerate, at least in part, due to the 
absence of proper navigational cues. in addition, through 
live imaging of axons at the dorsal root entry zone, Di Maio 
et al.[49] demonstrated that axons may regenerate across 
this border into CNS territory but stall after exhibiting 
presynaptic features[50].
More recently, there have been improvements in in 
vivo imaging of the spinal cord including spinal clamps to 
reduce movement artifacts from respiration, the use of two-
photon microscopy, and the use of chronically-implanted 
glass chambers[51-54]. The use of two-photon microscopy 
has many advantages including deep penetration into 
the tissue and low phototoxicity. in the context of axon 
regeneration, an additional advantage is being able to use 
the laser to lesion axons. This provides unparalleled control 
of the lesion and produces minimal scarring, which may 
be useful in distinguishing between neuron-intrinsic and 
-extrinsic mechanisms of axon regeneration. This laser 
ablation technique has also been used in the C. elegans 
model of axon regeneration[55, 56]. Such rapid improvements 
in in vivo imaging techniques will provide unprecedented 
temporo-spatial resolution of axon regeneration.
Fig. 3. Diagram of a pyramidotomy model. Corticospinal axons 
originate from layer 5 of the motor cortex, decussate at the 
medullary pyramids and descend the length of the spinal 
cord without significant bilateral innervation in rodents 
(A). A pyramidotomy lesions the corticospinal axons at the 
level of the brainstem before the decussation so that the 
contralateral spinal cord is virtually devoid of corticospinal 
innervation (B). Injection of a tracer into the intact tract 
can be observed at the level of the spinal cord (C) and 
assessed for axonal growth into the contralateral side.
Neurosci Bull     August 1, 2013, 29(4): 436–444442
So Which Model Should I Choose?
Animal models of SCi require skilled small-animal surgeons 
with proper knowledge of neuroanatomy as well as the 
ability to administer proper postoperative care such as 
manual bladder expression. if behavioral assessment is 
planned, then additional training in these techniques is 
required.  in addition, the necessary equipment, such as a 
stereotaxic frame and contusion device, must be available. 
if any of these resources are not available, then the 
choice of animal models is limited. For example, if twice-
daily manual bladder expression for the duration of the 
experiment is not logistically possible, then models such 
as dorsal hemisection or mid-thoracic contusion are not 
feasible. or if stereotaxic injections of anterograde axonal 
tracers are not feasible, then the study may be limited to 
axons that can be detected immunohistochemically, such 
as serotonin axons.
The particular goals of the study are also important 
factors in the selection of the animal model. if the main 
focus is on the intrinsic mechanisms of CST growth, then 
the pyramidotomy model offers several advantages such as 
ease of animal care and absence of a glial scar. However, if 
the goal is to overcome the glial scar, then an injury model 
with a robust glial response, such as a dorsal hemisection 
model, is suitable. These advantages and disadvantages 
are summarized in Table 1.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This review was supported by NiNDS 1R01NS081040-01, 
1R21NS082835-01, US Army W81XWH1010737, The Miami 
Project to Cure Paralysis, and Buoniconti Fund.
Received date: 2013-03-28; Accepted date: 2013-05-19
REFERENCES
[1] Cafferty WB, McGee AW, Strittmatter SM. Axonal growth 
therapeutics: regeneration or sprouting or plasticity? Trends 
Neurosci 2008, 31: 215–220.
[2] Steward o, Zheng B, Tessier-Lavigne M. False resurrections: 
distinguishing regenerated from spared axons in the injured 
central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 2003, 459: 1–8.
[3] Tuszynski MH, Steward o. Concepts and methods for the 
study of axonal regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 2012, 74: 
777–791.
[4] inman D, Guth L, Steward o. Genetic influences on 
secondary degeneration and wound healing following spinal 
cord injury in various strains of mice. J Comp Neurol 2002, 
451: 225–235.
Table 1. Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of different injury models to study axon regeneration
      injury model                                              Advantages                                                                           Disadvantages
Dorsal hemisection Most common model to study CST regeneration;  Large variability between different surgeons
 many hindlimb behavioral assays can be adapted
Complete transection Most rigorous model to show regeneration injury may be too severe to observe growth; 
  minimal behavioral recovery limits choice of 
  assays; dedicated postoperative care required
Dorsal column lesion Can be combined with conditioning lesion paradigm;  Limited choice of behavioral assays
 distinct anatomical tract that is easily located; bladder 
 expression not required 
Pyramidotomy Well-established CST sprouting model; does not pro- Not clinically relevant; behavioral assays 
 duce major glial scar; bladder expression not required limited to fine forelimb tests
Contusion Use of same device among labs; well-established  Requires an injury device; difficult to distinguish
 behavioral assays; most clinically relevant between spared and regenerated axons
Laser ablation with  Most convincing way to show regeneration; allows study No behavioral assays; not clinically relevant;
two-photon imaging of axons in real-time; bladder expression not required requires advanced microscopy; technically difficult
Do-Hun Lee, et al.    Animal models of axon regeneration after SCi 443
[5] Basso DM, Fisher LC, Anderson AJ, Jakeman LB, McTigue 
DM, Popovich PG. Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion 
detects differences in recovery after spinal cord injury in five 
common mouse strains. J Neurotrauma 2006, 23: 635–659.
[6] Kigerl KA, McGaughy VM, Popovich PG. Comparative 
analysis of lesion development and intraspinal inflammation 
in four strains of mice following spinal contusion injury. J 
Comp Neurol 2006, 494: 578–594.
[7] Ma M, Wei P, Wei T, Ransohoff RM, Jakeman LB. Enhanced 
axonal growth into a spinal cord contusion injury site in a 
strain of mouse (129X1/SvJ) with a diminished inflammatory 
response. J Comp Neurol 2004, 474: 469–486.
[8] Kostyk SK, Popovich PG, Stokes BT, Wei P, Jakeman LB. 
Robust axonal growth and a blunted macrophage response 
are associated with impaired functional recovery after spinal 
cord injury in the MRL/MpJ mouse. Neuroscience 2008, 156: 
498–514.
[9] Dimou L, Schnell L, Montani L, Duncan C, Simonen M, 
Schneider R, et al. Nogo-A-deficient mice reveal strain-
dependent differences in axonal regeneration. J Neurosci 
2006, 26: 5591–5603.
[10] Doetschman T. influence of genetic background on 
genetically engineered mouse phenotypes. Methods Mol Biol 
2009, 530: 423–433.
[11] Rossignol S, Frigon A. Recovery of locomotion after spinal 
cord injury: some facts and mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 
2011, 34: 413–440.
[12] Rossignol S, Bouyer L, Langlet C, Barthelemy D, Chau C, 
Giroux N, et al. Determinants of locomotor recovery after 
spinal injury in the cat. Prog Brain Res 2004, 143: 163–172.
[13] Lee JH, Jones CF, okon EB, Anderson L, Tigchelaar S, 
Kooner P, et al. A novel porcine model of traumatic thoracic 
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2013, 30: 142–159.
[14] Kuluz J, Samdani A, Benglis D, Gonzalez-Brito M, Solano 
JP, Ramirez MA, et al. Pediatric spinal cord injury in infant 
piglets: description of a new large animal model and review 
of the literature. J Spinal Cord Med 2010, 33: 43–57.
[15] Rosenzweig ES, Courtine G, Jindrich DL, Brock JH, 
Ferguson AR, Strand SC, et al. Extensive spontaneous 
plasticity of corticospinal projections after primate spinal cord 
injury. Nat Neurosci 2010, 13: 1505–1510.
[16] Bortoff GA, Strick PL. Corticospinal terminations in two new-
world primates: further evidence that corticomotoneuronal 
connections provide part of the neural substrate for manual 
dexterity. J Neurosci 1993, 13: 5105–5118.
[17] Courtine G, Bunge MB, Fawcett JW, Grossman RG, Kaas 
JH, Lemon R, et al. Can experiments in nonhuman primates 
expedite the translation of treatments for spinal cord injury in 
humans? Nat Med 2007, 13: 561–566.
[18] Ethier C, oby ER, Bauman MJ, Miller LE. Restoration of 
grasp following paralysis through brain-controlled stimulation 
of muscles. Nature 2012, 485: 368–371.
[19] Zheng B, Lee JK, Xie F. Genetic mouse models for studying 
inhibitors of spinal axon regeneration. Trends Neurosci 2006, 
29: 640–646.
[20] Brosamle C, Schwab ME. Cells of origin, course, and 
termination patterns of the ventral, uncrossed component of 
the mature rat corticospinal tract. J Comp Neurol 1997, 386: 
293–303.
[21] Brosamle C, Schwab ME. ipsilateral, ventral corticospinal 
tract of the adult rat: ultrastructure, myelination and synaptic 
connections. J Neurocytol 2000, 29: 499–507.
[22] Steward o, Zheng B, Ho C, Anderson K, Tessier-Lavigne M. 
The dorsolateral corticospinal tract in mice: an alternative 
route for corticospinal input to caudal segments following 
dorsal column lesions. J Comp Neurol 2004, 472: 463–477.
[23] Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Misgeld T, Sanes JR. 
Transgenic labeling of the corticospinal tract for monitoring 
axonal responses to spinal cord injury. Nat Med 2005, 11: 
1355–1360.
[24] Neumann S, Woolf CJ. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers 
into and beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord 
injury. Neuron 1999, 23: 83–91.
[25] Hoffman PN. A conditioning lesion induces changes in gene 
expression and axonal transport that enhance regeneration 
by increasing the intrinsic growth state of axons. Exp Neurol 
2010, 223: 11–18.
[26] Cao Z, Gao Y, Bryson JB, Hou J, Chaudhry N, Siddiq M, et 
al. The cytokine interleukin-6 is sufficient but not necessary 
to mimic the peripheral conditioning lesion effect on axonal 
growth. J Neurosci 2006, 26: 5565–5573.
[27] Blesch A, Lu P, Tsukada S, Alto LT, Roet K, Coppola G, et al. 
Conditioning lesions before or after spinal cord injury recruit 
broad genetic mechanisms that sustain axonal regeneration: 
superiority to camp-mediated effects. Exp Neurol 2012, 235: 
162–173.
[28] Stam FJ, MacGillavry HD, Armstrong NJ, de Gunst MC, 
Zhang Y, van Kesteren RE, et al. Identification of candidate 
transcriptional modulators involved in successful regeneration 
after nerve injury. Eur J Neurosci 2007, 25: 3629–3637.
[29] Gruner JA. A monitored contusion model of spinal cord injury 
in the rat. J Neurotrauma 1992, 9: 123–126; discussion 126–
128.
[30] Wrathall JR, Pettegrew RK, Harvey F. Spinal cord contusion 
in the rat: production of graded, reproducible, injury groups. 
Exp Neurol 1985, 88: 108–122.
[31] Stokes BT. Experimental spinal cord injury: a dynamic and 
verifiable injury device. J Neurotrauma 1992, 9: 129–131; 
discussion 131–124.
[32] Jakeman LB, Guan Z, Wei P, Ponnappan R, Dzwonczyk R, 
Neurosci Bull     August 1, 2013, 29(4): 436–444444
Popovich PG, et al. Traumatic spinal cord injury produced 
by controlled contusion in mouse. J Neurotrauma 2000, 17: 
299–319.
[33] Scheff SW, Rabchevsky AG, Fugaccia i, Main JA, Lumpp JE Jr. 
Experimental modeling of spinal cord injury: characterization 
of a force-defined injury device. J Neurotrauma 2003, 20: 
179–193.
[34] Nishi RA, Liu H, Chu Y, Hamamura M, Su MY, Nalcioglu o, et 
al. Behavioral, histological, and ex vivo magnetic resonance 
imaging assessment of graded contusion spinal cord injury in 
mice. J Neurotrauma 2007, 24: 674–689.
[35] Noble LJ, Wrathall JR. Spinal cord contusion in the rat: 
morphometric analyses of alterations in the spinal cord. Exp 
Neurol 1985, 88: 135–149.
[36] Li W, Cai WQ, Li CR. Repair of spinal cord injury by neural 
stem cells modified with BDNF gene in rats. Neurosci Bull 
2006, 22: 34–40.
[37] Barakat DJ, Gaglani SM, Neravetla SR, Sanchez AR, 
Andrade CM, Pressman Y, et al. Survival, integration, and 
axon growth support of glia transplanted into the chronically 
contused spinal cord. Cell Transplant 2005, 14: 225–240.
[38] Pearse DD, Pereira FC, Marcillo AE, Bates ML, Berrocal YA, 
Filbin MT, et al. cAMP and Schwann cells promote axonal 
growth and functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat 
Med 2004, 10: 610–616.
[39] Gao M, Lu P, Bednark B, Lynam D, Conner JM, Sakamoto 
J, et al. Templated agarose scaffolds for the support of 
motor axon regeneration into sites of complete spinal cord 
transection. Biomaterials 2013, 34: 1529–1536.
[40] Whishaw iQ, Pellis SM, Gorny B, Kolb B, Tetzlaff W. Proximal 
and distal impairments in rat forelimb use in reaching follow 
unilateral pyramidal tract lesions. Behav Brain Res 1993, 56: 
59–76.
[41] Starkey ML, Barritt AW, Yip PK, Davies M, Hamers FP, 
McMahon SB, et al. Assessing behavioural function following 
a pyramidotomy lesion of the corticospinal tract in adult mice. 
Expl Neurol 2005, 195: 524–539.
[42] Lee JK, Geoffroy CG, Chan AF, Tolentino KE, Crawford 
MJ, Leal MA, et al. Assessing spinal axon regeneration and 
sprouting in Nogo-, MAG-, and OMgp-deficient mice. Neuron 
2010, 66: 663–670.
[43] Thallmair M, Metz GA, Z’Graggen WJ, Raineteau o, Kartje 
GL, Schwab ME. Neurite growth inhibitors restrict plasticity 
and functional recovery following corticospinal tract lesions. 
Nat Neurosci 1998, 1: 124–131.
[44] Liu K, Lu Y, Lee JK, Samara R, Willenberg R, Sears-
Kraxberger i, et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative 
ability of adult corticospinal neurons. Nat Neurosci 2010, 13: 
1075–1081.
[45] Cafferty WB, Strittmatter SM. The Nogo-Nogo receptor 
pathway limits a spectrum of adult CNS axonal growth. J 
Neurosci 2006, 26: 12242–12250.
[46] Leong SK, Ling EA, Fan DP. Glial reaction after pyramidotomy 
in mice and rats. Neurodegeneration 1995, 4: 403–413.
[47] Feng G, Mellor RH, Bernstein M, Keller-Peck C, Nguyen QT, 
Wallace M, et al. imaging neuronal subsets in transgenic 
mice expressing multiple spectral variants of GFP. Neuron 
2000, 28: 41–51.
[48] Kerschensteiner M, Schwab ME, Lichtman JW, Misgeld T. In 
vivo imaging of axonal degeneration and regeneration in the 
injured spinal cord. Nat Med 2005, 11: 572–577.
[49] Di Maio A, Skuba A, Himes BT, Bhagat SL, Hyun JK, Tessler 
A, et al. In vivo imaging of dorsal root regeneration: rapid 
immobilization and presynaptic differentiation at the CNS/
PNS border. J Neurosci 2011, 31: 4569–4582.
[50] Han SB, Kim H, Skuba A, Tessler A, Ferguson T, Son YJ. 
Sensory Axon Regeneration: A Review from an in vivo 
imaging Perspective. Exp Neurobiol 2012, 21: 83–93.
[51] Farrar MJ, Bernstein iM, Schlafer DH, Cleland TA, Fetcho 
JR, Schaffer CB. Chronic in vivo imaging in the mouse spinal 
cord using an implanted chamber. Nat Methods 2012, 9: 
297–302.
[52] Davalos D, Lee JK, Smith WB, Brinkman B, Ellisman MH, 
Zheng B, et al. Stable in vivo imaging of densely populated 
glia, axons and blood vessels in the mouse spinal cord using 
two-photon microscopy. J Neurosci Methods 2008, 169: 1–7.
[53] Fenrich KK, Weber P, Hocine M, Zalc M, Rougon G, Debarbieux 
F. Long-term in vivo imaging of normal and pathological 
mouse spinal cord with subcellular resolution using implanted 
glass windows. J Physiol 2012, 590: 3665–3675.
[54] Davalos D, Akassoglou K. In vivo imaging of the mouse 
spinal cord using two-photon microscopy. J Vis Exp 2012: 
e2760.
[55] Yanik MF, Cinar H, Cinar HN, Chisholm AD, Jin Y, Ben-Yakar 
A. Neurosurgery: functional regeneration after laser axotomy. 
Nature 2004, 432: 822.
[56] Chen L, Wang Z, Ghosh-Roy A, Hubert T, Yan D, o’Rourke 
S, et al. Axon regeneration pathways identified by systematic 
genetic screening in C. elegans. Neuron 2011, 71: 1043–
1057.
