Mesenchymal stem cells improve locomotor
an
en
ersit
nma
rup
Accepted 10 October 2013
Available online 19 October 2013
Keywords:
Traumatic spinal cord injury
Locomotor recovery
Mesenchymal stem cells
Meta-analysis
(SCI) is a devastating event with huge personal and societal costs. A limited number
Spinal cord injury paraplegia at $300,000. Accordingly, if a person sustains a SCI at the
areas of the world are
).
the mechanical impact
d blood–brain-barrier,
Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Neurobiology
j ourna l homepage: www.e lhaemorrhages, disrupted axons, andbrokenneural-cell bodymembranes.
A broad spectrum of progressive secondary damage soon follows
(minutes to weeks), consisting of ischaemia, oedema, biochemical
Bresnahan; CI, confidence interval; CSPGs, chondroitin sulphateproteoglycans;D2, diversity;
I2, inconsistency measure; IFNγ, interferon gamma; lacZ, betagalactosidase; M1, classically
activated macrophage/microglia; M2, alternatively activated macrophage/microglia;
MAG, myelin-associated glycoprotein; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein;2012; Devivo, 2012; Geyh et al., 2013; Middleton et al., 2012). Almost
50% of all traumatic SCIs result in complete loss of function below the
cord lesion although the available data in many
lacking (New et al., in press; Noonan et al., 2012
In traumatic SCI, the primary damage refers to
that within seconds to minutes leads to a disrupteAbbreviations: α, risk of type I error; β, risk of type II error; BBB, Basso–Beattie–Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) is a catastrophic and disabling
event that results in severe motor, sensory, and autonomic dysfunction.
The costs of SCI are enormous for the affected individual with a
significant impact on quality of life and life expectancy (Boakye et al.,
age of 25, lifetime medical costs would surpass $3.3million in the case
of high tetraplegia and $1.1 million for paraplegia. Worldwide,
2.5 million people are affected with SCI, and every year more than
130,000 people sustain a traumatic SCI (Adams and Cavanagh, 2004).
In addition, as many are estimated to contract a non-traumatic spinalMSC, mesenchymal stem cell; Nogo-A, neurite outgrow
injury; SD, standard deviation; SE, standard error; TSA, tri
⁎ Corresponding author at: Cell Therapy Facility, The B
Clinical Immunology, Copenhagen University Hospital
DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Fax: +45 35390038.
E-mail address: oliveri@rh.dk (R.S. Oliveri).
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedir
0969-9961/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All ri
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.014level of injury and the cost of medical care for the first year for a patient
with high tetraplegia is estimated at $800,000 and for a patient withIntroductionSystematic reviewimpact.Mesenchymal stem or stromal cells (MSCs) have anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects andmay
thus reduce secondary damage after administration. We performed a systematic review with quantitative
syntheses to assess the evidence of MSCs versus controls for locomotor recovery in rat models of traumatic
SCI, and identified 83 eligible controlled studies comprising a total of 1,568 rats. Between-study heterogeneity
was large. Fifty-three studies (64%) were reported as randomised, but only four reported adequate
methodologies for randomisation. Forty-eight studies (58%) reported the use of a blinded outcome assessment.
A random-effects meta-analysis yielded a difference in behavioural Basso–Beattie–Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor
score means of 3.9 (95% confidence interval [CI] 3.2 to 4.7; Pb0.001) in favour of MSCs. Trial sequential analysis
confirmed the findings of the meta-analyses with the upper monitoring boundary for benefit being crossed by
the cumulative Z-curve before reaching the diversity-adjusted required information size. Only time from
intervention to last follow-up remained statistically significant after adjustment using multivariate random-
effects meta-regression modelling. Lack of other demonstrable explanatory variables could be due to insufficient
meta-analytic study power. MSCs would seem to demonstrate a substantial beneficial effect on locomotor
recovery in a widely-used animal model of traumatic SCI. However, the animal results should be interpreted
with caution concerning the internal and external validity of the studies in relation to the design of future clinical
trials.
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Received 2 July 2013
Revised 13 September 2013
of treatments exist to ameliorate the progressive secondary damage that rapidly follows the primarymechanical
Article history: Traumatic spinal cord injurycord injury: Systematic review with meta-
Roberto S. Oliveri a,⁎, Segun Bello b, Fin Biering-Sørens
a Cell Therapy Facility, The Blood Bank, Department of Clinical Immunology, Copenhagen Univ
b The Nordic Cochrane Centre, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, De
c Department of Spinal Cord Injuries, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet and Glost
a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oth inhibitor A; SCI, spinal cord
al sequential analysis.
lood Bank 2034, Department of
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9,
ect.com).
ghts reserved.recovery in traumatic spinal
alyses of rat models
c
y Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
rk
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark
of Disease
sev ie r .com/ locate /ynbd ichanges, and inflammatory cell responses that substantially aggravate
the primary injury in rostro-caudal direction, thus affecting subsequent
neural repair and regeneration (Hausmann, 2003; Oyinbo, 2011).
Detrimental biochemical changes include excessive calcium influx-
mediated neuron and glial apoptosis, glutamate excitotoxicity, lipid
peroxidation, and nitrous oxide excess. Main inflammatory effector cells
stem cells may hold promise as a novel treatment modality (Donnelly
et al., 2012; Sahni and Kessler, 2010). Accordingly, more than 2700
339R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353clinical cell therapy trials have been initiated during the first decade of
the 21st century (Culme-Seymour et al., 2012). Stem cells are a
heterogeneous group of cells, but share the unique feature of being
able to self-renew as well as differentiate into more specialised cells
by means of asymmetric cell division (Oliveri, 2007). Multipotent
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are currently occupying centre stage
in preclinical and clinical stem cell research due to their plethora of
regenerative effects together with their relative ease of isolation,
efficient ex vivo expansion, lack of ethical concerns, and acceptable
safety profile (Lalu et al., 2012; Prockop et al., 2010; Singer and
Caplan, 2011; Uccelli et al., 2008; von Bahr et al., 2012). Thus, human
MSCs have shown promising results in a number of diverse clinical
conditions such as graft-versus-host disease (Le Blanc et al., 2008),
Crohn's disease (Duijvestein et al., 2010), adjuvant induction therapy in
organ transplantation (Tan et al., 2012), and ischaemic cardiomyopathy
(Hare et al., 2012). MSC-like cells can be isolated from tissues such as
bone marrow, adipose tissue and umbilical cord, where they are
believed to reside in the perivascular niches and play a pivotal role in
local tissue homeostasis (Crisan et al., 2008). Besides having intrinsic
mesodermal differentiation capabilities, MSCs have more recently also
shown to exhibit other coveted properties such as anti-inflammatory,
immunomodulatory, anti-apoptotic, trophic and angiogenic effects.
These functions are believed to be mediated by transient paracrine
by-stander mechanisms and cell-to-cell contact in response to the local
damagedhost tissue environment rather than long-term cell engraftment
and cell replacement (Caplan and Correa, 2011; Meyerrose et al.,
2010; Prockop, 2007; von Bahr et al., 2012). Equally important, MSCs
demonstrate pathotropism by means of chemotaxis-induced homing
and migration to injured tissues following intravascular administrationcomprise waves of activated neutrophils and classically activated (M1)
blood borne macrophages and tissue-resident microglia (Beck et al.,
2010; Fleming et al., 2006) which are associated with the rapid increase
in neurotoxic matrix metalloproteinases, reactive oxygen species, and
pro-inflammatory cytokines (Fleming et al., 2006; Nguyen et al., 2007;
Noble et al., 2002).
Later, in the chronic phase, the spinal cord is characterised by
continuing white-matter demyelinisation, atrophy, Wallerian degen-
eration, and central cavity formation in previously injured areas.
Eventually, a developing glial scar is characterised by reactive astrocytes,
activated resident microglia, invading macrophages, and potent neurite
growth-inhibiting substances such as chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans
(CSPGs), myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG), and neurite outgrowth inhibitor (Nogo)-A
(Bregman et al., 1995; Filbin, 2003; Freund et al., 2006).
In a contusion lesion,which is themost commonmorphological type
of injury, the amount of primary macerated nervous tissue is relatively
low. Instead, progressive secondary damage is more predominant,
which in time may encompass several spinal segments above and
below the original impact, thus extending the functional impairment.
Especially the post-traumatic neuroinflammatory response is thought
to be one of the most important mediators herein (Trivedi et al., 2006).
Current best available care of SCI traumas includes early surgical
intervention, hypertensive therapy with vasoactive agents, and
methylprednisolone derivates, and future treatment modalities
may consist of promising early phase agents such as minocycline,
Cethrin™, and riluzole (Breslin and Agrawal, 2012; Cadotte and
Fehlings, 2011; Hawryluk et al., 2008; Kwon et al., 2011a; Kwon et
al., 2011b; Tator et al., 2012).
Mesenchymal stem cells
In the absence of full recovery for many cell degenerative disorders,(Karp and Leng Teo, 2009).MSCs have been shown to address and modulate many of the
detrimental effects associated with acute and chronic damage in the
traumatised spinal cord (Teixeira et al., 2013; Uccelli, 2013; Wright
et al., 2011). Ameliorating effects include neuron protection from
glutamate excitotoxicity (Lu et al., 2011; Uccelli et al., 2012; Voulgari-
Kokota et al., 2012), reduction in levels of stress-associated proteins,
pro-inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species (Lanza et al.,
2009; Zhou et al., 2009), inhibition of neutrophil adhesion, infiltration
and respiratory burst (Pati et al., 2011; Prockop and Oh, 2012;
Raffaghello et al., 2008), polarisation of classically activated pro-
inflammatory M1 into an alternatively activated pro-reparatory (M2)
macrophage phenotype (Giunti et al., 2012; Kim and Hematti, 2009;
Nakajima et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2010), secretion of neurotrophic
factors (Crigler et al., 2006; Hawryluk et al., 2012; Li et al., 2002;
Nakano et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2009), enhancement of neural stem
cell oligodendrogenic fate and remyelinisation (Inoue et al., 2003; Li
et al., 2009; Rivera et al., 2006; Steffenhagen et al., 2012), function as
axon guiding strands across lesion site (Hofstetter et al., 2002),
reduction of cavity formation and reactive astrocyte proliferation and
gliosis (Abrams et al., 2009; Voulgari-Kokota et al., 2012), and
stimulation of neurite outgrowth over CSPGs, MAG and Nogo-A
(Wright et al., 2007). In addition, research suggests that MSCs
themselves may transdifferentiate into glial and neuronal-like cells, at
least in vitro, although the exact transdifferentiation potential in vivo
remains debated (Chen et al., 2006; Krabbe et al., 2005). Taken together,
these observations suggest that administration of MSCs may lead to a
net beneficial effect in the recovery process following SCI secondary
damage.
Objective
A small number of human studies have investigated the use of MSCs
in SCI patients. They havemainly focused on safety and feasibility issues
and have lacked a proper randomised control group and have been
underpowered. By contrast, an increasing number of rodent studies
have during the last decade investigated the efficacy of MSCs on
locomotor recovery, a relevant clinical outcome which is considered
important among SCI patients (Kwon et al., 2012; Simpson et al., 2012).
Meta-analyses of controlled studies increase the power and
precision of the estimated intervention effect and therefore yield a
more powerful test of the null hypothesis than any of the separate
studies (Higgins and Green, 2008). However, to our knowledge, no
quantitative data synthesis of a stem cell therapy for SCI exists. We
therefore, systematically reviewed and meta-analyzed studies that
assessed the efficacy of MSCs versus control (placebo or no treatment)
in an established and widely used animal model of traumatic SCI. Our
aim was to determine whether MSCs improved locomotor recovery
and to use meta-analysis and meta-regression to explore for variations
in effect size. Finally, we subjected the studies to an assessment of bias
to exclude systematic errors and to an assessment of risks of play of
chance to exclude random errors.
Material and methods
Eligibility criteria
Types of studies: Controlled studies assessing the administration of
MSCs to rats with traumatic SCI. No language, publication date, or
publication status restrictions were imposed.
Types of participants: Laboratory rats of any age, gender or strain
exposed to traumatic SCI induced by contusion or compression.
Laceration/transection models of SCI were excluded as this model
does not represent the typical crush injury mechanism in humans and
has limited rostro-caudal secondary damage spread (Beattie and
Bresnahan, 2000; Dietz and Curt, 2006).
Types of intervention: Plastic-adherent, ex vivo expanded MSCs
(Dominici et al., 2006) irrespective of donor species or tissue
origin. MSCs substantially manipulated, e.g., into neuron-like cells
(differentiation cocktails, transfection) were excluded whereas
more basic cell culturing steps maintaining overall MSC phenotype
were allowed (e.g., activation or ‘licensing’ with IFNγ). Labeling or
transfection with markers for cellular tracing and imaging (green
fluorescent protein, lacZ, bromodeoxyuridine, superparamagnetic iron
oxide particles etc.) were included. Co-culture or concomitant injection
with other cell types or use of adjuvant products (e.g., matrices,
scaffolding), whether these were used for seeding prior or during
transplantation or used to recruit MSCs in vivo, were excluded. Control
interventions consisted of placebo (saline, culture medium or similar
vehicle) or no treatment.
Type of outcomemeasure: Behavioural assessmentmeasured by the
Basso–Beattie–Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor rating scale (Basso et al.,
1995), which is a well-documented and widely used ordinal (i.e. non-
linear) scale with discrete values ranging from 0 (no observable hind
limb movement) to 21 (coordinated gait, consistent toe clearance,
340 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353predominant paw position is parallel throughout stance, consistent
trunk stability, and tail is consistently up). It subjectively documents
limb movements and walking characteristics in an open-field
environment and is a useful indicator of the basic overground
locomotion of the animal and whether or not the animal would be
capable of performing more difficult motor-related assessment tests
that require specific abilities (Burke and Magnuson, 2012).
Information sources, literature search and study selection
Studieswere identifiedby searchingbibliographic databases, scanning
reference lists of articles, and hand-searching. No limits were applied for
language and non-English papers were translated. We developed a
sensitive literature search strategy (Table 1) and our search in biblio-
graphic databases was applied to MEDLINE and EMBASE (dates of
inception to 1 Nov 2012). Titles and abstracts of identified references
were screened for eligibility and clearly irrelevant references were
excluded. Remaining references underwent full-paper assessment. Final
eligibility assessment was performed by one skilled reviewer (RSO)
with particular knowledge of isolation, culture and characterisation of
MSCs.
Data collection process
We sought to avoid double counting and pieced together data from
multiple reports of the same study by, e.g., juxtaposing author names,
treatment comparisons, sample sizes, or outcomes. We contacted
Table 1
Search terms used in the bibliographic databases MEDLINE and EMBASE (searched from
dates of inception to 1 Nov 2012).
Database Search terms
MEDLINE
(PubMed)
(mesenchymal stem cells [mh] ORmesenchymal stromal cells [mh] OR
mesenchymal stem cell* [tiab] ORmesenchymal stromal cell* [tiab] OR
marrow stromal cell* [tiab] OR bone marrow stem cell*[tiab] OR bone
marrow-derived stromal cell* [tiab] OR mesenchymal precursor cell*
OR MSCs [tiab] OR MSC [tiab] OR BMSCs [tiab] OR BMSC [tiab] OR
wharton jelly [mh] OR wharton's jelly [tiab] or umbilical cord stroma
[tiab] OR fetal blood [mh] OR umbilical cord blood [tiab] OR UCB [tiab]
OR adipose-derived stromal cell* [tiab] OR ASCs [tiab] OR adipose stem
cell* [tiab] OR pre-adipocyte* [tiab] OR stromal vascular fraction stem
cell* OR adipose tissue-derived stem cell* OR ASC [tiab] OR dental pulp
[tiab]) AND (spinal cord injuries [mh] OR spinal cord injury [tiab] OR
spinal cord injuries [tiab] OR spinal cord contusion [tiab] OR spinal cord
transection [tiab] OR injured spinal cord [tiab])
EMBASE (mesenchymal stem cells.mp. OR mesenchymal stem cell/OR
mesenchymal stromal cells.mp. or mesenchymal stroma cell/OR bone
marrow stromal cells.mp.) AND (spinal cord injury.mp. or spinal cord
injury/)corresponding investigators by e-mail to obtain additional information
not clearly reported in the reference. If investigators did not respond
within two weeks, their reference was excluded from quantitative
syntheses if missing items necessitated calculation of summary effect
measures. If a corresponding investigator did not provide information
on a putative explanatory variable, the study was still included in the
primary meta-analysis but excluded from descriptive analyses and the
relevant subgroup analyses and meta-regressions.
Data items
The following items decided a priori were extracted from each
included study: reference details (journal name, publication year, and
name, contact information and affiliation of the corresponding
investigator); recipient animal (rat strain, sex, average weight); SCI
(traumatic model and affected spinal cord segment); MSCs (donor
species and tissue source); intervention regime (time from SCI to
intervention, administration route, number of injections, and total
dose); use of immunosuppressive agent;methodological quality (method
of generation of allocation sequence, method of allocation concealment,
blinding of study personnel or outcome assessors, and considerations on
sample size or study power). From the primary extracted data we
stratified the country of origin according to socio-economic development
and longstanding tradition in modern biomedical research (Panagiotou
et al., 2013), calculated mean relative MSC dose (cells/kg), and classified
the graft type according to donor-recipient similarity (i.e. autologous,
syngeneic, allogeneic, or xenogeneic).
Risk of bias in individual studies
To ascertain quality components associated with spurious treatment
effect in clinical trials (Hrobjartsson et al., 2013; Savovic et al., 2012;
Wood et al., 2008), two reviewers (RSO and SB) working independently
and with adequate reliability determined the adequacy of randomisation
and concealment of allocation, blinding of study personnel and outcome
assessors, and registered sample size estimations or power calculations.
Disagreements between the reviewers were resolved by consensus.
Summary effect measure
Summary effect measure was the difference in BBB score means
between MSC group and control at maximal follow-up. To calculate
this we extracted for each group: mean BBB score, standard deviation
(SD) and group size. Where a mean BBB score was measured serially,
only the final measure was used. If BBB scores were reported for each
hind leg, an average value was calculated. In studies including both a
placebo group and a no-treatment group, the two mean BBB scores
and SDs were averaged, respectively, and the group sizes were added
up (Higgins and Deeks, 2008). If an SD was not reported directly, it
was calculated by multiplying the reported standard error (SE) with
the square root of the group size. If numbers necessary for the
calculation of summary effect measures were not adequately reported
in the main text, data points were extracted from published graphs
and recorded using graph digitizing software (GetData Graph Digitizer
2.24; S. Fedorov; http://getdata-graph-digitizer.com).
Synthesis of results
The meta-analysed difference of BBB score means with 95% con-
fidence interval (CI) was calculated using the random-effects model
in anticipation of significant experimental diversity between studies
(DerSimonian and Laird, 1986). A random-effects model suggests the
expected average BBB improvement of all samples of individual true
effect sizes and not a single common true effect size from studies
dispersed due to sampling error. Statistical heterogeneity was explored
2using the inconsistency (I ) measure (Higgins and Thompson, 2002).
341R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353For referenceswith twoormore separateMSCgroups compared against a
common control group (e.g. different administration route or dose), the
control group sizewas divided equally among the number ofMSC groups
(Higgins et al., 2008).
Risk of bias across studies
To assess the possibility of publication bias (‘the file drawer effect’)
and other reporting biases we plotted the difference of BBB score
means against its precision, i.e. 1/standard error of BBB difference
(Egger et al., 1997). The level of asymmetry of this ‘funnel plot’ was
assessed with Egger's linear regression method (Egger et al., 1997) and
Duval and Tweedie's trim-and-fill method (Duval and Tweedie, 2000).
Additional analyses
Cumulative meta-analysis was performed in order to establish
approximate publication year for evidence of effect. However, since
meta-analyses are prone to inflated random errors (both type I and type
II errors) due to sparse data and repeated significance testing as study
data accumulate, we also applied trial sequential analysis (TSA) in order
to confirm the results of the meta-analyses (Wetterslev et al., 2008,
2009). TSA adjusts for random-error risk and provides a conservative
estimate of the required number of study subjects (information size) in
order to carry out a definitive meta-analysis. Meta-analyses not reaching
the required information size are analysed with monitoring boundaries
analogous to interim monitoring boundaries in a single clinical trial
(Brok et al., 2008; Thorlund et al., 2009). We calculated the required
information size based on a median final mean BBB score in the control
group, a minimal relevant difference of mean BBB score approximately
corresponding to the lower confidence limit of the intervention effect
size yielded by the primary meta-analysis, an overall significance level
(α) of 0.05, a type II error (β) risk of 0.1 (i.e., power of 90%), and a
diversity (D2) estimated empirically by the TSA software (Wetterslev
et al., 2009). Next, to adjust for between-study heterogeneity, the
required information size was then corrected with the factor 1/(1−D2)
to yield a final diversity-adjusted required information size. A cumulative
Z-curvewas constructed by including each study according to the order of
their publication year. If more studies were published the same year, we
analysed studies in alphabetical order, according to the last name of the
first author. We assessed the crossing of the cumulative Z-curve of the
discrete monitoring boundaries based on the O'Brien–Fleming type α-
spending function (O'Brien and Fleming, 1979), which is relatively
insensitive to the number of repeated significance tests (Thorlund et al.,
2011).
Subgroup analyses were performed with stratification according
to a number of pre-specified categorical explanatory variables, and
differences between subgroups were evaluated with the Q-test
for heterogeneity based on a random-effects model with pooled
estimate of τ2 (Borenstein et al., 2009b).
Univariate random-effects meta-regression was performed in order
to explore the potential effect of a number of pre-specified continuous
explanatory variables using the method of moments (Borenstein et al,
2009a).
Potential explanatory variables were included in a multivariate
random-effects meta-regression model to adjust for spurious statistical
significance (Berkey et al., 1995; Harbord and Higgins, 2008; Knapp and
Hartung, 2003). We did not allow the number of explanatory variables
to exceed a ratio of 1:10 compared to the number of studies (Deeks
et al., 2008; Higgins and Thompson, 2002).
Statistics
Descriptive statistics were performed with SPSS Statistics 20.0 (IBM
Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Funnel plot asymmetry assessment, meta-
analyses, testing for differences between subgroups, and continuousunivariate meta-regressions were conducted with Comprehensive
Meta Analysis 2.2 (Biostat Inc., Englewood, NJ, USA). TSAwas conducted
with TSA Viewer 0.9 beta (Copenhagen Trial Unit, Copenhagen,
Denmark, www.ctu.dk/tsa). Multivariate meta-regression was con-
ducted with Stata 12.0 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). A two-
sided P-value b 0.05 was considered statistically significant except for
TSAs where significance level varied according to the calculated
O'Brien–Fleming type α-spending function.
Results
Study selection
We identified 83 eligible studies/comparisons reported in 61
references comprising a total of 1,568 rats to be included in our main
meta-analysis (Fig. 1; Table S1). A further 24 studies reported in 17
references were considered eligible but did not report the necessary
data for the calculation of the summary effect measures and were
therefore excluded from further analyses (Table S2). Of those 24 studies,
22 reported a beneficial effect of MSCs.
Study characteristics
Table S3 shows the characteristics of the included studies. The
median year of publication was 2010 (range of 2000 to 2012). Median
sample size for all 83 studies was 16 rats (range of 8 to 43). Eleven
studies (13%) reported considerations of sample size but none provided
exact details on sample size calculations. Forty-nine studies (59%) were
from less developed countries, eight studies (10%) were from countries
in transition, and 26 studies (31%)were frommore developed countries
(Panagiotou et al., 2013). China was the single biggest contributor
reporting almost one third (31%) of all studies. Sixteen studies were
published in non-English journals.
Bone marrow was the most frequently used MSC tissue source
(84%). Allogeneic and xenogeneic MSCs were predominant graft types
(57%) and human MSCs were used in 30 (36%) studies. Of 80 studies
using allogeneic or xenogeneic MSCs, 22 (28%) reported the use of
an immunosuppressive agent (predominantly cyclosporin) following
transplantation.
Four different rat strains were used as recipients with Sprague–
Dawley (46%) and Wistar (49%) rats comprising the vast majority.
Contusion lesion was used in 78% compared to compression. All
studies except one (spinal cord level L1) reported induction of SCI in
the thoracic region (range T6 to T12) with spinal cord levels T8 to T10
comprising 68%. Thus, no study investigated a cervical SCI model.
Median time from SCI to intervention was 7days (range of 0 to 90),
and median time from intervention to final BBB score assessment was
35days (range of 21 to 365).
Intraparenchymal injection (64%) was the most frequently reported
administration route (median total dose of 5 × 105 MSCs; range of
3×103 to 5×106). Median total dose for intrathecal injection (17%) was
1.25×106 MSCs (range of 1×105 to 5×106) whereas for the remaining
studies intravenous (17%) median total dose was 1 × 105 MSCs (range
of 1 × 103 to 9 × 106), which corresponded to a relative dose of
4.2×106MSCs/kg (range of 3.1×106 to 3.3×107). Two studies reported
intra-ventricular administration by means of drilled transcranial route.
Risk of bias within studies
Fifty-three studies comprising 1,047 rats (67%) were labelled as
randomised. Of these, four studies (I2 = 93%) reported adequate
randomisation procedure (i.e. both adequate generation of allocation
sequence and adequate allocation concealment) whereas the other 49
studies (I2=98%) had unclear randomisation procedure. The remaining
30 studies (I2 = 99%) comprising 521 rats (33%) did mention
randomisation at all. No study reported blinding of study personnel
342 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353whereas 48 studies comprising 891 rats (57%) reported use of blinded
outcome assessment. Four studies had both adequate randomisation
and blinded outcome assessment.
Meta-analysis of all studies
Fig. 2 shows a forest plot of the primary random-effects meta-
analysis of all 83 eligible studies. There was high between-study
heterogeneity (I2= 98.9%). Pooled difference in BBB score means was
3.9 (95% CI 3.1 to 4.7; P b 0.001) in favour of MSCs. No study reported
a statistically significant detrimental effect.
Risk of bias across studies
Fig. 3 shows funnel plots of the differences in mean BBB scores
against their precision (inverse SE). Neither Egger's linear regression
method (intercept 0.49; 95% CI −2.49 to 3.48; P = 0.74) nor Duval
and Tweedie's trim-and-fill method suggested the presence of
unidentified negative studies (Fig. 3). Separate funnel plots and formal
testing stratified according to randomisation (adequate, unclear or no
description) did not indicate publication bias of negative studies, but
again of missing positive studies (data not shown).
Additional analyses
Fig. 4 shows a plot of the cumulative meta-analysis stratified
according to publication year, without adjustment for repeated
significance testing. The figure suggests that sufficient evidence of the
beneficial effect of MSCs on locomotor recovery began to accumulate
from 2006 onwards.
Fig. 1. Flow chart illustrating the literature search strategy and the different phases of study e
November 2012.Based upon an estimatedmedian value of 8.5 of themeanBBB scores
in the control groups, a difference in mean BBB score of 3.0
(approximately corresponding to the lower 95% confidence limit from
the primary meta-analysis), an overall significance level (α) of 0.05, a
type II error risk (β) of 0.1 (i.e., power 90%), and diversity (D2) of
100% in all studies in a random-effects model meta-analysis, we
calculated that the diversity-adjusted required information size to
detect or reject such an intervention effect as 859 rats (Fig. 5). The
cumulative Z-score crossed the upper monitoring boundary for benefit
after the 19th study (published in 2007) or 389 accrued rats with a
continuing upward slope, confirming a beneficial effect of MSCs on
locomotor recovery if one disregards the risks of bias (Fig. 5A). We
then repeated TSA using a minimal relevant difference of 1.0 (i.e., the
lowest possible discrete value on the BBB scale) which yielded a
diversity-adjusted required information size of 7087 rats. The trial
sequential monitoring boundary for benefit was this time crossed by
the cumulative Z-score after the 66th study (published in 2011) or
1243 accrued rats (Fig. 5B) thus confirming adequate study power to
detect the smallest possible intervention effect size on the BBB scale.
Subgroup analyses (Fig. 6) suggested that locomotor recovery was
associated with graft type (P b 0.001), recipient rat strain (P b 0.001),
SCI trauma model (P=0.017), immunosuppressive status in allogeneic
or xenogeneic grafting (P = 0.047) and blinded outcome assessment
(P = 0.042), but not with adequacy of randomisation procedure (P =
0.614), MSC donor tissue (P = 0.636), administration route (P =
0.624), described as randomised (P = 0.341), or national level of
longstanding research tradition (P = 0.159). Continuous univariate
meta-regression suggested that an increase in difference in BBB score
increased as time from SCI to intervention increased (P b 0.001). When
stratifying relative cell dose according to administration route, increased
ligibility assessment. Bibliographic databases were searched from dates of inception to 1
Fig. 2. Forest plot of a random-effects meta-analysis of 83 eligible studies (comprising 1568 rats) comparingMSCs versus controls on locomotor recovery after traumatic SCI. Results from
each study are displayed as a square and a horizontal line, representing the intervention effect estimate (difference in BBB score means) together with its 95% CI. The combined random-
effects estimate (3.9) and its 95% CI (3.1 to 4.7) are represented by a diamond at the bottom. Roman numerals in brackets after author name and year represent separate eligible studies/
comparisons from within the same bibliographic reference.
343R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353
nda
add
344 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353should begin with and end with systematic reviews (Chalmers, 2009;
Clarke et al., 2007), and a number of cases have illustrated that omission
may have serious consequences for public health (Crowley et al., 1990;
Fergusson et al., 2005; Gilbert et al., 2005; Teo et al., 1993). Notably,
translational stem cell research has become a particularly sensitive
research area because many ‘treatments’ that lack any evidence of
beneficial effect are currently being offered to vulnerable groups of
patients (Blight et al., 2009; Regenberg et al., 2009). The key advantage
of a systematic approach of a meta-analysis is that all steps are clearlyintervention effect size was positively correlated with relative cell dose
for intraparenchymal (P b 0.001) and intrathecal administration route
(P b 0.001) but negatively correlated with cell number for intravenous
route (P b 0.001). Effect size was positively correlated to time from
intervention to final BBB score assessment (P b 0.001). However, after
adjustment in a multivariate random-effects meta-regression, only
time from intervention to final BBB score assessment remained
significantly associated with locomotor recovery (P=0.022).
Discussion
It has been forcefully argued that all reports of new interventions
Fig. 3. Funnel plot of the differences in BBB score means against their precision (inverse sta
with 95% CI. Formal assessment with Duval and Tweedie's trim-and-fill method does not
unidentified and the overall intervention effect size (filled diamond) remains unchanged.described so that the process is fully transparent. Accordingly,
systematic reviews andmeta-analyses of animal studies offer a sensible
and rational approach to assess the translational potential of promising
experimental interventions before decisions are made to proceed with
clinical trials. The present review is, to our knowledge, the first attempt
to systematically collect all available evidence and critically assess and
quantify the efficacy of a stem cell population in a widely used
preclinical model of traumatic SCI.
Summary of evidence
Using a sensitive and exhaustive literature search strategy we
identified more than 80 eligible studies. Our random-effects meta-
analysis suggested a beneficial effect of MSCs, which TSA confirmed
using highly conservative monitoring boundaries for statistical
significance. The use of a random-effects model suggests the expected
average BBB improvement of all samples of individual true effect sizes
and not a single common true effect size from studies dispersed
due to sampling error. However, to extrapolate the exact size of the
observed BBB difference into a human clinical setting would be
nonsensical. Furthermore, in accepting these effects one has to
disregard the substantial risks of bias that the included studies maysuffer from. On the other hand, we could not demonstrate an effect of
bias risks on the estimated intervention effect.
Some studies reported very large treatment effects reflecting very
limited spontaneous recovery in the control group (e.g. Vaquero et al.,
2006). We do not have an explanation for such findings other than the
use of a muchmore severe contusion model with release of the impactor
from a much greater height, perhaps in combination with late inter-
vention. However, we do not think it would be appropriate to exclude
such studies with ‘outlying’ data based on post-hoc considerations.
Cumulative meta-analysis suggested that evidence of a beneficial
effect began to accumulate from 2006 onwards. Similarly, our TSA
showed that such an effect existed (without risks of random errors)
by 2007 based upon a minimal relevant difference of 3.0 in the BBB
score (or by 2011 based upon a minimal relevant difference of 1.0),
thus suggesting that a substantial number of rat SCI studies may have
been conducted to limited avail.
Statistical heterogeneity and explanatory variables
As anticipated, we observed substantial between-study heterogeneity
on treatment effect. Heterogeneity not explained by random error is a
consequence of experimental diversity between studies (Deeks et al.,
rd error). The open diamond represents the pooled random-effects intervention effect size
any imputed studies on left side of the plot suggesting that no negative studies remain2008). The observed heterogeneity was so substantial that it may be
questioned if it is meaningful to conduct a meta-analysis. On the other
hand, meta-analytic subgroup analyses can investigate heterogeneous
results or answer specific questions about experimental groups,
intervention scheme, or types of study. Our pre-specified subgroup
analyses and univariate meta-regression suggested that the effect of
MSCs on locomotor recovery could be associated with some explanatory
variables. However, it is important to keep inmind that such analyses are
entirely observational by nature and not based on randomised
comparisons. Hence, they suffer the usual limitations of any observational
investigation, including bias through confounding by other potential
explanatory variables. Importantly, subgroup analyses can only be
hypothesis generating and not hypothesis confirmatory (Deeks et al.,
2008).We also conducted amultivariate random-effectsmeta-regression
to allow the effects of potential explanatory variables to be investigated
simultaneously (Thompson and Higgins, 2002). However, we found
that a positive correlation between time from intervention to final BBB
score assessment and locomotor recovery was the only explanatory
variable that remained statistically significant. This observation may
be explained by the fact that a substantial number of studies conducted
the final BBB score assessment before reaching the plateau recovery
phase.
Fig. 4. Cumulative forest plot of meta-analyses with individual studies added in a stepwise manner according to publication year and surname of the first author. Results from each
cumulative meta-analysis are displayed as a square and a horizontal line, representing the treatment effect estimate together with its 95% CI. Thus, the treatment effect plotted next to
each study name represents the accumulated pooled treatment effect of this study combined with all the studies ranked above it. As the data accumulate (i.e. increasing sample size)
the treatment effect steadily begins to oscillate to a lesser degree and the 95% CI becomes more narrow after a certain point of accumulated data. The data indicate that evidence of
beneficial effect of MSCs on locomotor recovery began to accumulate from 2006 onwards.
345R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353
346 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353ABias risk
Reporting of methodological components, such as randomisation
and blinding, was generally poor and therefore limits the assessment
of risk of bias of the included studies. Only four studies reported both
adequate method of generation of allocation sequence and adequate
allocation concealment. These studies also implemented the use of a
placebo, which reduces the risk of assessment bias. Furthermore, no
study reported blinding of study personnel, and only 48 (58%) studies
reported blinding of outcome assessors, which is in accordance with
the findings of others (Perel et al., 2007). However, stratification
according to methodological components did not show any significant
association with treatment effect after adjustment in a meta-
regression nor suggest publication bias against negative studies using
trim-and-fill. However, the lack of demonstrable association between
potential explanatory variables and treatment effect could be due to
inadequate meta-analytic study power.
B
Fa
vo
ur
s
co
n
tro
l
Fig. 5. TSAs of the effect of MSCs on locomotor recovery after SCI. (A) The diversity-adjusted req
groups, aminimum relevant difference inmean BBB score of 3.0, an overall significance level (α
(vertical dotted red line). The cumulative Z-curve (solid blue line) connected by individual stu
(descending dotted red line) after the 19th study (389 accrued rats) at a cumulative Z-score of 3.
is 1568 rats, corresponding to 183% of the diversity-adjusted required information size. (B) The d
of 8.5 in the control groups, aminimum relevant difference inmean BBB score of 1.0, an overall s
and equals 8,087 rats (vertical dotted red line). The cumulative Z-curve (solid blue line) co
monitoring boundary of benefit (descending dotted red line) after the 66th study (1243 accrue
rats (as of date of literature search) is 1568 rats, corresponding to 22% of the diversity-adjusteMSC tissue source
We could not detect any clear association between locomotor
recovery and MSCs isolated from specific tissues. Bone marrow and
adipose tissue (and to a lesser extent umbilical cord stroma) have
been the traditional tissue sources of MSCs in clinical stem cell research.
Although MSCs from different tissues share certain characteristics of
morphology, plastic adherence and differentiation potential (Dominici
et al., 2006), it has become evident that there are subtle but distinct
tissue differences in, e.g., expression of surface markers, which could
be important for the design of MSC-based interventions (Heazlewood
and Atkinson, 2013). Bone marrow-derived MSCs have remained
the ‘gold standard’ having been most thoroughly characterised in
preclinical and clinical research. Bone marrow-derived MSCs can be
easily isolated from the iliac crest and efficiently ex vivo expanded to
several hundred millions cells within a relatively short period of time
(Bartmann et al., 2007; Schallmoser et al., 2008). Initial isolation and
uired information size is based on amedian value of mean BBB scores of 8.5 in the control
) of 0.05, a type II risk (β) of 0.1 (i.e. power 90%), a diversity (D) of 100% and equals 859 rats
dies (small diamonds) crosses the upper O'Brien–Fleming monitoring boundary of benefit
24 (P=0.0012) (black arrow). Total number of accrued rats (as of date of literature search)
iversity-adjusted required information size is based on amedian value ofmean BBB scores
ignificance level (α) of 0.05, a type II risk (β) of 0.1 (ie. power 90%), a diversity (D) of 100%
nnected by individual studies (omitted for clarity) crosses the upper O'Brien–Fleming
d rats) at a cumulative Z-score of 7.57 (Pb 0.0001) (black arrow). Total number of accrued
d required information size (7087 rats).
347R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353purging of adipose tissue-derived MSCs can be somewhat more
cumbersome compared to bonemarrow-derived MSCs, although initial
cell number in the adipose stromal vascular fraction, proliferation rates
Fig. 6. Forest plots of subgroup analyses stratified according to a number of potential explanator
combined random-effects estimate with corresponding 95% CI for each subgroup is presentedand final yield can be very high (Trojahn Kølle et al., 2013). MSCs from
umbilical cord stroma may represent a distinct population of ‘pristine’
MSCs ontogenetically situated between more lineage-restricted adult
y variables. The individual studies have been omitted from the plots for clarity and only the
(diamonds). Abbreviations: MSC =mesenchymal stem cell; CI = confidence interval.
348 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353MSCs and pluripotent embryonic stem cells. Cell harvesting from the
umbilical cord stroma is non-invasive and accordingly does not pose
any ethical challenges, since this tissue is otherwise discarded. Notably,
the cells could have superior immunosuppressive effects compared to
adult tissue sources (Manochantr et al., 2013; Najar et al., 2012).
Graft type
Immunosuppressive agents reduce secondary damage and may
improve outcomes following SCI (Diaz-Ruiz et al., 1999, 2004; Ibarra
et al., 2003), although there are rat-strain specific differences in responses
(Cui et al., 2007). Hence, the concomitant use of immunosuppressive
agents in rats transplantedwithMSCs could explain someof the observed
effect in locomotor recovery. However, we could not detect any increased
locomotor recovery associated with the use immunosuppression in our
subgroup analysis of studies using allogeneic or xenogeneic grafts. In a
direct head-to-head comparison Hodgetts et al. did not detect any
differences in locomotor recovery using cyclosporin (Hodgetts et al., in
press). The hypo-immunogenic properties of MSCs and lack of long-
term engraftment could be plausible explanations for this observation.
Timing
The development of secondary spinal cord damage follows a
distinct timeframe, and in for example neonatal hypoxic–ischaemic
encephalopathy timing of interventional hypothermia has been
shown to be crucial (Jacobs et al., 2013). However, after adjusting
for other explanatory variables, we were not able to detect any
clear association between locomotor recovery and timing of MSC
administration. However, this finding could be due to lack of
accumulated study power and it should be noted that one uneligible
study assessing different timing schedules would seem to favour
early (b72h) MSC intervention in the rat model (Osaka et al., 2010).
Administration route
Because recovery from SCI may depend on the preservation of
remaining axons and neurons in the injury region, it is essential
that these not be further depleted by procedures aimed at repair.
We were not able to detect any statistically significant differences
on locomotor recovery between intraparenchymal, intrathecal
or intravenous administration. Three included studies specifically
compared intraparenchymal and intravenous route (Jing et al., 2008;
Kang et al., 2012; Khalatbary and Tiraihi, 2009). Interestingly, intravenous
administration did not perform inferior to intraparenchymal with two of
the studies using the same cell dose for both routes (Jing et al., 2008; Kang
et al., 2012). Similar observations has been made by Morando et al.
comparing intravenous and intrathecal MSC injection in an animal
model of multiple sclerosis (Morando et al., 2012). By contrast, Vaquero
et al. observed no effect of intravenous administered MSCs compared to
intraparenchymal route, which may be explained by their use of a severe
force of contusion combinedwith late intervention (Vaquero et al., 2006).
Finally, in a recent study on a chronicmodel of SCI byKimet al. (published
after our literature search) both intravenously and intraparenchymal
administration of the same amount ofMSCs resulted in similar locomotor
recovery despite fewer numbers of observable engrafted cells in the
intravenous group (Kim et al., 2013).
The local MSC concentration necessary for an observable beneficial
effect may be relatively low in the damaged spinal cord area, thus
facilitating efficient autologous MSC ex vivo expansion and subsequent
local administration. On the other hand SCI poses substantial challenges
to intraparenchymal injection due to pre-existing tissue injury, relatively
large injection volumes, high cell concentrations, and high delivery rates.
Current techniques aremainly limited to a single injection during an open
surgical exposure. One difficulty is that methods to observe injectate
dispersion and monitor tissue pressure during injection have not beenthoroughly established. This has raised concerns that intraparenchymal
injectionsmay cause further tissue injury that varies fromminor to severe
(e.g. needle trauma). Injectate backout or extrusion, which has previously
been considered a technical failure, may be argued as being a clear
indicator of excessive intraparenchymal pressure (Guest et al., 2011).
Accordingly, pressure based injections of large volumesmay be damaging
because the tissue tolerances may be exceeded by raised intra-
parenchymal pressures leading to hydrodynamic dissection and possible
ischemia (Guest et al., 2011).
Intrathecal administration has been proposed as less invasive
method (Bakshi et al., 2004). The technique is well suited to
multiple injections over an extended time period and it may be
possible to use intrathecal catheter techniques to make injections
closer to the target site, thereby perhaps increasing local MSC
concentration. On the other hand, it is perhaps less likely that
transplanted MSCs will efficiently home to sites of chronic disease
due to lacking inflammatory cell activity, dysfunctional subarachnoid
space, and occlusion by scarring.
The advantages of intravenous administration include lack of need of
an operating theatre or procedural imaging combined with extensive
clinical experience on thousands of patients since the first MSC infusions
in the 1990s. In a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 36
clinical trials comprising 1,012 patients there were no development of
acute infusional toxicity, organ system complications, infection, or longer
term adverse events (death, malignancy) associated with intravenous
MSC administration (Lalu et al., 2012). An increased risk of transient
fever was reported, not unlike similar reactions occasionally observed
with red blood cell transfusions, but this was not associated with any
long term sequelae. The putative low fraction of the infused MSCs
reaching target lesion site could be a major obstacle for intravenous
delivery since the majority of MSCs are trapped within the lungs during
pulmonary passage due to their size, adhesion molecules and possibly
deformability (Fischer et al., 2009). However, pulmonary trapping
seems to be a transient phenomenon, and MSC can exert therapeutic
plasticity even if not migrating completely to the lesion site due
to secretion of factors or cross-talking with immune cells in regional
lymph nodes (Kim et al., 2013; Uccelli, 2013). Other potential
disadvantages of intravascular administration include risk of instant
blood-mediated inflammatory reaction after blood exposure due to
prothrombotic factors on the MSC surface which may compromise
cell survival, engraftment, and function (Moll et al., 2012). However,
low-passage MSCs, as typically used in clinical applications, show
only a weak triggering at the currently applied clinical doses (1 to
3 × 106MSC/kg) (Moll et al., 2012).
Dose
Median relative MSC dose was 4.2 × 106 MSC/kg for rats receiving
systemic infusion. This is somewhatmore than standard doses currently
used in clinical trials (1 to 3 × 106 MSC/kg) yet manageable to
manufacture and relative doses of up to 10 × 106 MSC/kg have been
reported (Jing et al., 2008; Kang et al., 2012; Koc et al., 2002).
The correlations between cell dose and locomotor recovery observed
for each administration route in three separate univariate meta-
regressions could not be reproduced in our multivariate meta-
regression when adjusting for other explanatory variables. However,
this finding could be due to lack of accumulated study power and it
should be noted that two of the included studies suggest an association
between increasedMSC dose and locomotor recovery (Li et al., 2010; Pal
et al., 2010).
Strengths and limitations of the systematic review
Our systematic review poses a number of advantages compared to
previous attempts to summarise the evidence of stem cell therapies for
SCI (Tetzlaff et al., 2011). First, our up-to-date literature search yielded
349R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353more than 50 additional eligible studies, thus accumulating adequate
study power to detect the smallest possible minimal relevant difference
in BBB score means (1.0) as witnessed by our TSAs. Second, our search
also included the EMBASE bibliographic database, which is known to
contain a substantial number of especially non-English journals not
registered elsewhere. The actual degree of reference overlap varies
according to the medical topic but a comprehensive bibliographic search
normally requires the inclusion of EMBASE (Suarez-Almazor et al., 2000).
Accordingly, we were able to identify a substantial number of eligible
non-English references which hitherto have remained relatively
unnoticed. Third, we assessed study risk of bias using quality components
based on empirical evidence (Hrobjartsson et al., 2013; Savovic et al.,
2012; Wood et al., 2008). Fourth, we addressed the risk of publication
bias. Fifth, we contacted investigators in case of inadequate reporting.
Sixth, we explored study heterogeneity and sought to identify potential
explanatory variables. Finally, we quantified the intervention effect
using advanced statistical methodology (meta-analysis, TSA, subgroup
analysis, and meta-regression).
Ourfindings and interpretation are closely related to the experimental
design and methodological quality of the included studies. Three major
barriers impede successful clinical translation of interventional animal
studies, namely low internal validity (systematic error [bias] and random
error [play of chance]), publication bias, and low external validity.
Although it is always possible to increase internal validity of a study
and properly address publication bias, external validity poses unique
challenges which are not easily resolved (Akhtar et al., 2008).
Accordingly, a number of cases have illustrated that translation from
promising animal studies to clinical trials is not straightforward and the
usefulness of animal studies as ameans of guiding future clinical research
has been challenged (Sandercock and Roberts, 2002). For example, in an
analysis of 76 highly cited animal studies (median citation count: 889)
published in leading scientific high-impact journals, only about one
third of the paperswere later translated at the level of human randomised
clinical trials (Hackam and Redelmeier, 2006).
Internal validity
The methodological quality of interventional animal studies should
be no less rigorous than clinical trials since preclinical research often
forms the basis on which subsequent early clinical trials are designed
and conducted. Internal validity is the sine qua non and refers to how
close the intervention effect size in the study sample reflects the true
intervention effect size in the population from which the sample was
drawn. Risk of bias due to inadequate randomisation (selection bias),
non-blinded study personnel (performance bias), or non-blinded
outcome assessors (detection bias) is associated with overestimation
of intervention effect size in clinical trials, especially for subjective
outcomes such as BBB scoring (Hrobjartsson et al., 2013; Savovic et al.,
2012). Empirical research suggests that study methods tend to be as
good as or better than reported (Hill et al., 2002; Hrobjartsson et al.,
2009; Soares et al., 2004), although reporting of unclear allocation
concealment may reflect actual study conduct (Pildal et al., 2005).
Unfortunately, the internal validity of animal studies is generally poor
(Bebarta et al., 2003; Crossley et al., 2008; Vesterinen et al., 2010) and
hence inadequate reporting of study methods can impede the
assessment of quality and the risk of bias of the results. Limitations in
reporting of study methods may therefore have attenuated estimated
effects of study design characteristics. For example, in our systematic
review, the label ‘unclear’ was frequently applied because the
method was not reported in the reference. However, reported study
methodology need not to correspond to how a study was actually
conducted, since a well-conducted study may be reported badly
(Huwiler-Muntener et al., 2002) and vice versa. In our study we were
not able to demonstrate a statistically significant association between
methodological components and treatment effect after adjusting with
meta-regression. This could be due to lack of adequate meta-analyticstudy power. Another explanation is that poor reporting of the studies
could have led to misclassification of studies, e.g., some studies that
did not mention whether or not the assessments were blinded could
in fact, have been blinded. Importantly, our subgroup analyses stratified
according to methodological components would still seem to suggest a
beneficial effect of MSCs even if studies of lower quality were excluded.
An increasing amount of preclinical research and clinical trials is being
conducted in less socio-economically developed countries without
longstanding tradition in modern biomedical research (Bajpai and
Saraya, 2009; Malakoff, 2008; Varawalla, 2007), and stem cell research
is no exception to this trend (Cohen and Cohen, 2010; McMahon et al.,
2010; Ryan et al., 2010; Salter et al., 2007; Yuan et al., 2012). It has
therefore been recommended that researchers undertaking systematic
reviews should consider how to manage research data from these
countries (Panagiotou et al., 2013; Vickers et al., 1998), since they tend
to show significantly more favorable treatment effects for the same
intervention compared to studies from more developed countries
(Panagiotou et al., 2013). Such discrepancies may reflect known
geographical biases in reporting or study design (Vickers et al., 1998;
Wu et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2011) as well as genuine differences in
baseline risk or treatment implementation (although the latter would
seem unlikely in the case of animal studies). In accordance with the
general trend in global stem cell research, a large proportion of the
included studies in our systematic review were from less developed
countries. However, our subgroup analysis could not detect a statistically
significant difference in reported locomotor recovery. This, however,
could be due to lack of adequate meta-analytic study power.
Publication bias
Similar to clinical trials, the unintentional exclusion of eligible animal
studies in a systematic review will usually result in an overestimation of
the intervention effect size simply because unpublished studies often
contain neutral or negative data (Sena et al., 2010). Unfortunately,
publication bias is prevalent in animal research (Perel et al., 2007). To
assess the level of publication bias we generated a funnel plot, but did
not detect any publication bias against missing negative studies using
two formal testing methods.
External validity
External validity represents the concept of generalizing observations
and conclusions from a selected study sample to future populations of
interest. Following this context, translation of animal studies to clinical
trials can be regarded as an extreme case of external validity. Factors
that impede the clinical external validity of animal studies are many
(Curt, 2012) including differences in anatomy and pathophysiology
(Howells et al., 2010), animal strains (Mills et al., 2001; Popovich
et al., 1997; Rex et al., 2007), disease model (Onifer et al., 2007), co-
morbidity (Crossley et al., 2008), intervention schemes (Perel et al.,
2007), and outcome measure (Dietz and Curt, 2006).
We included only one mammal species to enable the use of an
identical, valid and reliable locomotor rating scale and because
inflammatory reactions after SCI may differ between experimental
animal species (Sroga et al., 2003) thus potentially adding further
experimental heterogeneity to the meta-analysis. We focused on the
laboratory rat for a number of reasons. First, rats and humans have
similar immune cell and cytokine response following SCI, although
timings are different (Beck et al., 2010; Fleming et al., 2006; Kwon
et al., 2010; Stammers et al., 2012) and differences in the magnitude
and duration of macrophage activation throughout the lesion exist
between rat strains (Popovich et al., 1997). Second, although induced
trauma in rats does not addresses all aspects of spinal damage (Onifer
et al., 2007) it fairly reflects the condition in human patients (Metz
et al., 2000). Unfortunately, none of our included studies assessed the
effect of MSCs on cervical SCI. Third, rat MSCs share similar
350 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353characteristics with human MSCs irrespective of strain (Barzilay et al.,
2009; Harting et al., 2008). Fourth, the reliability of the BBB scale as
assessment for locomotor recovery is well recognised (Basso et al.,
1996), and the crucial break point for locomotion is the onset of weight
bearing, on which depends proper hind limb stepping (Sedy et al.,
2008). Although originally developed for contusion injuries, the scale
also works well for other types of injuries such as balloon compression
lesion (Sedy et al., 2008). However, it is important to emphasise the
non-linear nature of this scale. Thus, e.g. three points increase on the
scale could mean a clinically relevant improvement or not, depending
where on the scale this is observed. Furthermore, any attempt to
translate a BBB difference of 3.9 into a clinically relevant SCI quantitative
outcomemeasure would of course be nonsensical. Finally, it should also
be taken into account that the BBB score may be regarded as unreliable
as a sole neurobehavioral outcome assessment. The reporting of other
neurobehavioral outcome measures was, however, more infrequent
thus making quantitative pooling unfeasible for meta-analysis.
Taken together it has been suggested that rats and humans have an
analogous relationship with respect to functional, electrophysiological,
and morphological outcomes. Furthermore, the techniques for
evaluating the extent and severity of SCI in humans and rats are of
comparable value indicating that the rat serves as an adequate animal
model for research on functional and morphological changes after SCI
and the effects of new treatment strategies. Unfortunately, there is no
consensus on how locomotor changes in animals should be interpreted
both with respect to the potential effect size and specific aspects for
human locomotion, such as postural stability, weight bearing, duration
and speed (Curt, 2012). Recovery time for rats reaching final stationary
plateau phase is considerably shorter compared to humans (Curt, 2012).
Notably, many BBB score assessmentswere conducted at final follow-up
before reaching stationary plateau phase, thus likely to underestimate
the true average intervention effect size, an observation which our
multivariate meta-regression supports. Finally, it is important to stress
that none of the included studies assessed the use of MSCs on a cervical
SCI model, which complicates the translation of our results further to
humans where cervical SCI is frequent.
In the recognition of failing translation of promising animal studies
to clinical effect, Kwon et al. have recently proposed a grading system
to evaluate the translational potential of experimental neuroprotective
therapies for acute SCI (Kwon et al., 2011c). Using this 5-item grading
system we evaluated MSCs for SCI. Interestingly, despite the lack of
cervical models we estimated a calculated a score substantially above
the hitherto highest ranking intervention (minocycline), which is due
to high scores of other items rated as highly important by this consensus
scale (Kwon et al., 2011c).
Conclusions
Our systematic review with meta-analyses would seem to suggest
that MSCs have substantial beneficial effect on locomotor recovery in
ratmodels of traumatic SCI. The results should, however, be interpreted
in light of the known limitations in animal experimental design and
methodological quality.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.014.
Author contributions
Roberto S. Oliveri conceived and designed the systematic review;
developed literature search strategy; screened titles and abstracts; full-
paper assessed references; extracted data; assessed quality components;
calculated summary effect measures; performed meta-analyses, trial
sequential analyses, subgroup analyses, univariate meta-regression and
funnel plot asymmetry assessments; interpreted data; drafted the first
version of themanuscript, and edited and approved the final manuscript.
Segun Bello assessed quality components; performed multivariate meta-regression analysis; interpreted data; co-drafted and approved the final
manuscript. Fin Biering-Sørensen co-conceived the systematic review;
interpreted data; co-drafted and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors have no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
Roberto S. Oliveri would like to thank the investigators Michael
Chopp, Rachelle Franzen, Jung Keun Hyun, Pavla Jendelová, Shen Jun,
Chizuka Ide, Serdar Kabatas, Jian-Hua Lin, Gang Liu, Martin Oudega,
Rakhi Pal, and Eva Syková for kindly providing additional data on
request. Dr. Christian Gluud is thanked for his useful comments and
assistance with TSA software. Dr. Arash Afshari is thanked for his help
with translation of Persian references.
References
Abrams, M.B., Dominguez, C., Pernold, K., Reger, R., Wiesenfeld-Hallin, Z., Olson, L.,
Prockop, D., 2009. Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells attenuate chronic
inflammation and injury-induced sensitivity to mechanical stimuli in experimental
spinal cord injury. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 27, 307–321.
Adams, M., Cavanagh, J.F., 2004. International Campaign for Cures of Spinal Cord Injury
Paralysis (ICCP): another step forward for spinal cord injury research. Spinal Cord
42, 273–280.
Akhtar, A.Z., Pippin, J.J., Sandusky, C.B., 2008. Animal models in spinal cord injury: a
review. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 47–60.
Bajpai, V., Saraya, A., 2009. Boom in clinical research industry: a dangerous trend. Trop.
Gastroenterol. 30, 177–181.
Bakshi, A., Hunter, C., Swanger, S., Lepore, A., Fischer, I., 2004. Minimally invasive delivery
of stem cells for spinal cord injury: advantages of the lumbar puncture technique.
J. Neurosurg. Spine 1, 330–337.
Bartmann, C., Rohde, E., Schallmoser, K., Purstner, P., Lanzer, G., Linkesch, W., Strunk, D.,
2007. Two steps to functional mesenchymal stromal cells for clinical application.
Transfusion 47, 1426–1435.
Barzilay, R., Sadan, O., Melamed, E., Offen, D., 2009. Comparative characterization of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells from four different rat strains.
Cytotherapy 11, 435–442.
Basso, D.M., Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C., 1995. A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating
scale for open field testing in rats. J. Neurotrauma 12, 1–21.
Basso, D.M., Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C., 1996. Graded histological and locomotor
outcomes after spinal cord contusion using the NYU weight-drop device versus
transection. Exp. Neurol. 139, 244–256.
Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C., 2000. Cell death, repair, and recovery of function after spinal
cord injury in rats. In: Kalb, R.G., Strittmatter, S.M. (Eds.), Neurobiology of Spinal Cord
Injury. Humana Press, Totowa, pp. 1–22.
Bebarta, V., Luyten, D., Heard, K., 2003. Emergency medicine animal research: does use of
randomization and blinding affect the results? Acad. Emerg. Med. 10, 684–687.
Beck, K.D., Nguyen, H.X., Galvan, M.D., Salazar, D.L., Woodruff, T.M., Anderson, A.J., 2010.
Quantitative analysis of cellular inflammation after traumatic spinal cord injury:
evidence for a multiphasic inflammatory response in the acute to chronic
environment. Brain 133, 433–447.
Berkey, C.S., Hoaglin, D.C., Mosteller, F., Colditz, G.A., 1995. A random-effects regression
model for meta-analysis. Stat. Med. 14, 395–411.
Blight, A., Curt, A., Ditunno, J.F., Dobkin, B., Ellaway, P., Fawcett, J., Fehlings, M., Grossman,
R.G., Lammertse, D.P., Privat, A., Steeves, J., Tuszynski, M., Kalichman, M., Guest, J.D.,
2009. Position statement on the sale of unproven cellular therapies for spinal cord
injury: the international campaign for cures of spinal cord injury paralysis. Spinal
Cord 47, 713–714.
Boakye, M., Leigh, B.C., Skelly, A.C., 2012. Quality of life in persons with spinal cord injury:
comparisons with other populations. J. Neurosurg. Spine 17, 29–37.
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L.V., Higgins, J.P.T., Rothstein, H.R., 2009a. Meta-regression.
Introduction to Meta-analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester 187–203.
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L.V., Higgins, J.P.T., Rothstein, H.R., 2009b. Subgroup analyses.
Introduction to Meta-analysis.John Wiley & Sons, Chichester 149–186.
Bregman, B.S., Kunkel-Bagden, E., Schnell, L., Dai, H.N., Gao, D., Schwab, M.E., 1995.
Recovery from spinal cord injury mediated by antibodies to neurite growth
inhibitors. Nature 378, 498–501.
Breslin, K., Agrawal, D., 2012. The use of methylprednisolone in acute spinal cord injury: a
review of the evidence, controversies, and recommendations. Pediatr. Emerg. Care
28, 1238–1245.
Brok, J., Thorlund, K., Gluud, C., Wetterslev, J., 2008. Trial sequential analysis reveals
insufficient information size and potentially false positive results in many meta-
analyses. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 61, 763–769.
Burke, D.A., Magnuson, D.S.K., 2012. Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan scale locomotor
assessment following spinal cord injury and its utility as a criterion for other
assessments. In: Chen, J., Xu, X.-M., Xu, Z.C., Zhang, J.H. (Eds.), Animal Models of
Acute Neurological Injuries II. Humana Press, New York City, pp. 591–604.
351R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353Cadotte, D.W., Fehlings, M.G., 2011. Spinal cord injury: a systematic review of current
treatment options. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 469, 732–741.
Caplan, A.I., Correa, D., 2011. The MSC: an injury drugstore. Cell Stem Cell 9, 11–15.
Chalmers, I., 2009. The lethal consequences of failing to make use of all relevant evidence
about the effects of medical treatments: the need for systematic reviews. In:
Rothwell, P. (Ed.), Treating Individuals: From Randomized Trials to Personalised
Medicine. Elsevier, London, pp. 37–58.
Chen, Y., Teng, F.Y., Tang, B.L., 2006. Coaxing bone marrow stromal mesenchymal stem
cells towards neuronal differentiation: progress and uncertainties. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.
63, 1649–1657.
Clarke, M., Hopewell, S., Chalmers, I., 2007. Reports of clinical trials should begin and end
with up-to-date systematic reviews of other relevant evidence: a status report. J. R.
Soc. Med. 100, 187–190.
Cohen, C.B., Cohen, P.J., 2010. International stem cell tourism and the need for effective
regulation. Part I: Stem cell tourism in Russia and India: clinical research, innovative
treatment, or unproven hype? Kennedy Inst. Ethics J. 20, 27–49.
Crigler, L., Robey, R.C., Asawachaicharn, A., Gaupp, D., Phinney, D.G., 2006. Human
mesenchymal stem cell subpopulations express a variety of neuro-regulatorymolecules
and promote neuronal cell survival and neuritogenesis. Exp. Neurol. 198, 54–64.
Crisan,M., Yap, S., Casteilla, L., Chen, C.W., Corselli,M., Park, T.S., Andriolo, G., Sun, B., Zheng,
B., Zhang, L., Norotte, C., Teng, P.N., Traas, J., Schugar, R., Deasy, B.M., Badylak, S.,
Buhring, H.J., Giacobino, J.P., Lazzari, L., Huard, J., Peault, B., 2008. A perivascular origin
for mesenchymal stem cells in multiple human organs. Cell Stem Cell 3, 301–313.
Crossley, N.A., Sena, E., Goehler, J., Horn, J., van der Worp, B., Bath, P.M., Macleod, M.,
Dirnagl, U., 2008. Empirical evidence of bias in the design of experimental stroke
studies: a metaepidemiologic approach. Stroke 39, 929–934.
Crowley, P., Chalmers, I., Keirse, M.J., 1990. The effects of corticosteroid administration
before preterm delivery: an overview of the evidence from controlled trials. Br.
J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 97, 11–25.
Cui, Q., Hodgetts, S.I., Hu, Y., Luo, J.M., Harvey, A.R., 2007. Strain-specific differences in the
effects of cyclosporin A and FK506 on the survival and regeneration of axotomized
retinal ganglion cells in adult rats. Neuroscience 146, 986–999.
Culme-Seymour, E.J., Davie, N.L., Brindley, D.A., Edwards-Parton, S., Mason, C., 2012. A
decade of cell therapy clinical trials (2000–2010). Regen. Med. 7, 455–462.
Curt, A., 2012. The translational dialogue in spinal cord injury research. Spinal Cord 50,
352–357.
Deeks, J.J., Higgins, J.P.T., Altman, D.G., 2008. Analysing data and undertaking meta-
analyses. In: Higgins, J.P.T., Green, S. (Eds.), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic
Reviews of Interventions. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, pp. 151–185.
DerSimonian, R., Laird, N., 1986. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control. Clin. Trials 7,
177–188.
Devivo, M.J., 2012. Epidemiology of traumatic spinal cord injury: trends and future
implications. Spinal Cord 50, 365–372.
Diaz-Ruiz, A., Rios, C., Duarte, I., Correa, D., Guizar-Sahagun, G., Grijalva, I., Ibarra, A., 1999.
Cyclosporin-A inhibits lipid peroxidation after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurosci.
Lett. 266, 61–64.
Diaz-Ruiz, A., Vergara, P., Perez-Severiano, F., Segovia, J., Guizar-Sahagun, G., Ibarra, A.,
Rios, C., 2004. Cyclosporin-A inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase activity and
expression after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurosci. Lett. 357, 49–52.
Dietz, V., Curt, A., 2006. Neurological aspects of spinal-cord repair: promises and
challenges. Lancet Neurol. 5, 688–694.
Dominici, M., Le Blanc, K., Mueller, I., Slaper-Cortenbach, I., Marini, F., Krause, D., Deans, R.,
Keating, A., Prockop, D., Horwitz, E., 2006. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent
mesenchymal stromal cells. The International Society for Cellular Therapy position
statement. Cytotherapy 8, 315–317.
Donnelly, E.M., Lamanna, J., Boulis, N.M., 2012. Stem cell therapy for the spinal cord. Stem
Cell Res Ther 3, 24.
Duijvestein, M., Vos, A.C., Roelofs, H., Wildenberg, M.E., Wendrich, B.B., Verspaget, H.W.,
Kooy-Winkelaar, E.M., Koning, F., Zwaginga, J.J., Fidder, H.H., Verhaar, A.P., Fibbe,
W.E., van den Brink, G.R., Hommes, D.W., 2010. Autologous bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stromal cell treatment for refractory luminal Crohn's disease: results
of a phase I study. Gut 59, 1662–1669.
Duval, S., Tweedie, R., 2000. Trim and fill: a simple funnel-plot-based method of testing
and adjusting for publication bias in meta-analysis. Biometrics 56, 455–463.
Egger, M., Davey, S.G., Schneider, M., Minder, C., 1997. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a
simple, graphical test. BMJ 315, 629–634.
Fergusson, D., Glass, K.C., Hutton, B., Shapiro, S., 2005. Randomized controlled trials of
aprotinin in cardiac surgery: could clinical equipoise have stopped the bleeding?
Clin. Trials 2, 218–229.
Filbin, M.T., 2003. Myelin-associated inhibitors of axonal regeneration in the adult
mammalian CNS. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 703–713.
Fischer, U.M., Harting, M.T., Jimenez, F., Monzon-Posadas, W.O., Xue, H., Savitz, S.I., Laine,
G.A., Cox Jr., C.S., 2009. Pulmonary passage is a major obstacle for intravenous stem
cell delivery: the pulmonary first-pass effect. Stem Cells Dev. 18, 683–692.
Fleming, J.C., Norenberg, M.D., Ramsay, D.A., Dekaban, G.A., Marcillo, A.E., Saenz, A.D.,
Pasquale-Styles, M., Dietrich, W.D., Weaver, L.C., 2006. The cellular inflammatory
response in human spinal cords after injury. Brain 129, 3249–3269.
Freund, P., Schmidlin, E., Wannier, T., Bloch, J., Mir, A., Schwab, M.E., Rouiller, E.M., 2006.
Nogo-A-specific antibody treatment enhances sprouting and functional recovery
after cervical lesion in adult primates. Nat. Med. 12, 790–792.
Geyh, S., Ballert, C., Sinnott, A., Charlifue, S., Catz, A., D'Andrea Greve, J.M., Post, M.W.,
2013. Quality of life after spinal cord injury: a comparison across six countries. Spinal
Cord 51, 322–326.
Gilbert, R., Salanti, G., Harden, M., See, S., 2005. Infant sleeping position and the sudden
infant death syndrome: systematic review of observational studies and historical
review of recommendations from 1940 to 2002. Int. J. Epidemiol. 34, 874–887.Giunti, D., Parodi, B., Usai, C., Vergani, L., Casazza, S., Bruzzone, S., Mancardi, G., Uccelli, A.,
2012. Mesenchymal stem cells shapemicroglia effector functions through the release
of CX3CL1. Stem Cells 30, 2044–2053.
Guest, J., Benavides, F., Padgett, K., Mendez, E., Tovar, D., 2011. Technical aspects of spinal
cord injections for cell transplantation. Clinical and translational considerations. Brain
Res. Bull. 84, 267–279.
Hackam, D.G., Redelmeier, D.A., 2006. Translation of research evidence from animals to
humans. JAMA 296, 1731–1732.
Harbord, R.M., Higgins, J.P.T., 2008. Meta-regression in Stata. Stata J. 8, 493–519.
Hare, J.M., Fishman, J.E., Gerstenblith, G., DiFede Velazquez, D.L., Zambrano, J.P., Suncion,
V.Y., Tracy, M., Ghersin, E., Johnston, P.V., Brinker, J.A., Breton, E., Davis-Sproul, J.,
Schulman, I.H., Byrnes, J., Mendizabal, A.M., Lowery, M.H., Rouy, D., Altman, P.,
Wong Po, F.C., Ruiz, P., Amador, A., Da, S.J., McNiece, I.K., Heldman, A.W., 2012.
Comparison of allogeneic vs autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stem cells delivered by transendocardial injection in patients with ischemic
cardiomyopathy: the POSEIDON randomized trial. JAMA 308, 2369–2379.
Harting, M., Jimenez, F., Pati, S., Baumgartner, J., Cox Jr., C., 2008. Immunophenotype
characterization of rat mesenchymal stromal cells. Cytotherapy 10, 243–253.
Hausmann, O.N., 2003. Post-traumatic inflammation following spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord 41, 369–378.
Hawryluk, G.W., Rowland, J., Kwon, B.K., Fehlings, M.G., 2008. Protection and repair of the
injured spinal cord: a review of completed, ongoing, and planned clinical trials for
acute spinal cord injury. Neurosurg. Focus. 25, E14.
Hawryluk, G.W., Mothe, A., Wang, J., Wang, S., Tator, C., Fehlings, M.G., 2012. An in vivo
characterization of trophic factor production following neural precursor cell or
bone marrow stromal cell transplantation for spinal cord injury. Stem Cells Dev. 21,
2222–2238.
Heazlewood, C., Atkinson, K., 2013. Optimal tissue sources of mesenchymal stromal cells
for clinical applications. In: Chase, L.G., Vemuri, M.C. (Eds.), Mesenchymal Stem Cell
Therapy. Springer, New York, pp. 355–372.
Higgins, J.P.T., Deeks, J.J., 2008. Selecting studies and collecting data. In: Higgins, J.P.T.,
Green, S. (Eds.), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.
Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, pp. 151–185.
Higgins, J.P.T., Green, S., 2008. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Intervention. Chichester, Wiley-Blackwell.
Higgins, J.P., Thompson, S.G., 2002. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. Stat.
Med. 21, 1539–1558.
Higgins, J.P.T., Deeks, J.J., Altman, D.G., 2008. In: Higgins, J.P.T., Green, S. (Eds.), Special
Topics in Statistics. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, pp. 481–529.
Hill, C.L., LaValley, M.P., Felson, D.T., 2002. Discrepancy between published report and
actual conduct of randomized clinical trials. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 55, 783–786.
Hodgetts, S.I., Simmons, P.J., Plant, G.W., 2013. Human mesenchymal precursor cells
(Stro-1+) from spinal cord injury patients improve functional recovery and tissue
sparing in an acute spinal cord injury rat model. Cell Transplant. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3727/096368912X656081 (in press).
Hofstetter, C.P., Schwarz, E.J., Hess, D., Widenfalk, J., El, M.A., Prockop, D.J., Olson, L., 2002.
Marrow stromal cells form guiding strands in the injured spinal cord and promote
recovery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 2199–2204.
Howells, D.W., Porritt,M.J., Rewell, S.S., O'Collins, V., Sena, E.S., van derWorp, H.B., Traystman,
R.J., Macleod, M.R., 2010. Different strokes for different folks: the rich diversity of animal
models of focal cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 1412–1431.
Hrobjartsson, A., Pildal, J., Chan, A.W., Haahr, M.T., Altman, D.G., Gotzsche, P.C., 2009.
Reporting on blinding in trial protocols and corresponding publications was often
inadequate but rarely contradictory. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 62, 967–973.
Hrobjartsson, A., Thomsen, A.S., Emanuelsson, F., Tendal, B., Hilden, J., Boutron, I., Ravaud,
P., Brorson, S., 2013. Observer bias in randomized clinical trials with measurement
scale outcomes: a systematic review of trials with both blinded and nonblinded
assessors. CMAJ 185, E201–E211.
Huwiler-Muntener, K., Juni, P., Junker, C., Egger, M., 2002. Quality of reporting of
randomized trials as a measure of methodologic quality. JAMA 287, 2801–2804.
Ibarra, A., Correa, D., Willms, K., Merchant, M.T., Guizar-Sahagun, G., Grijalva, I., Madrazo,
I., 2003. Effects of cyclosporin-A on immune response, tissue protection and motor
function of rats subjected to spinal cord injury. Brain Res. 979, 165–178.
Inoue, M., Honmou, O., Oka, S., Houkin, K., Hashi, K., Kocsis, J.D., 2003. Comparative
analysis of remyelinating potential of focal and intravenous administration of
autologous bonemarrow cells into the rat demyelinated spinal cord. Glia 44, 111–118.
Jacobs, S.E., Berg, M., Hunt, R., Tarnow-Mordi, W.O., Inder, T.E., Davis, P.G., 2013. Cooling
for newborns with hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database Syst.
Rev. 1 CD003311.
Jing, W.-L., Yan, F.-X., Zuo, Y.-Z., 2008. Comparison of various mesenchymal stem cell
transplatation pathways for treatment of spinal cord injury in rats. J. Clin. Rehab.
Tissue Eng. Res. 12, 10045–10049 ([serial online],Avaialbe from: Journal of Clinical
Rehabilitative (P.O. Box 1200, Shenyang 110004, China).
Kang, E.S., Ha, K.Y., Kim, Y.H., 2012. Fate of transplanted bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells following spinal cord injury in rats by transplantation
routes. J. Korean Med. Sci. 27, 586–593.
Karp, J.M., Leng Teo, G.S., 2009. Mesenchymal stem cell homing: the devil is in the details.
Cell Stem Cell 4, 206–216.
Khalatbary, A.R., Tiraihi, T., 2009. A comparative study of therapeutic benefits of
intraspinal and intravenous bone marrow stromal cell administration to spinal cord
injuries. Iran. Biomed. J. 13, 43–48.
Kim, J., Hematti, P., 2009. Mesenchymal stem cell-educated macrophages: a novel type of
alternatively activated macrophages. Exp. Hematol. 37, 1445–1453.
Kim, J.W., Ha, K.Y., Molon, J.N., Kim, Y.H., 2013. Bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation for chronic spinal cord injury in rats: comparative study between
intralesional and intravenous transplantation (in press). Spine (Phila Pa 1976).
352 R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353Knapp, G., Hartung, J., 2003. Improved tests for a random effects meta-regression with a
single covariate. Stat. Med. 22, 2693–2710.
Koc, O.N., Day, J., Nieder, M., Gerson, S.L., Lazarus, H.M., Krivit, W., 2002. Allogeneic
mesenchymal stem cell infusion for treatment of metachromatic leukodystrophy
(MLD) and Hurler syndrome (MPS-IH). Bone Marrow Transplant. 30, 215–222.
Krabbe, C., Zimmer, J., Meyer, M., 2005. Neural transdifferentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells—a critical review. APMIS 113, 831–844.
Kwon, B.K., Stammers, A.M., Belanger, L.M., Bernardo, A., Chan, D., Bishop, C.M., Slobogean,
G.P., Zhang, H., Umedaly, H., Giffin, M., Street, J., Boyd, M.C., Paquette, S.J., Fisher, C.G.,
Dvorak, M.F., 2010. Cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory cytokines and biomarkers of
injury severity in acute human spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 27, 669–682.
Kwon, B.K., Okon, E., Hillyer, J., Mann, C., Baptiste, D., Weaver, L.C., Fehlings, M.G., Tetzlaff,
W., 2011a. A systematic review of non-invasive pharmacologic neuroprotective
treatments for acute spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 1545–1588.
Kwon, B.K., Okon, E.B., Plunet, W., Baptiste, D., Fouad, K., Hillyer, J., Weaver, L.C., Fehlings,
M.G., Tetzlaff, W., 2011b. A systematic review of directly applied biologic therapies
for acute spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 1589–1610.
Kwon, B.K., Okon, E.B., Tsai, E., Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C., Magnuson, D.K., Reier, P.J.,
McTigue, D.M., Popovich, P.G., Blight, A.R., Oudega, M., Guest, J.D., Weaver, L.C.,
Fehlings, M.G., Tetzlaff, W., 2011c. A grading system to evaluate objectively the
strength of pre-clinical data of acute neuroprotective therapies for clinical translation
in spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 1525–1543.
Kwon, B.K., Ghag, A., Dvorak, M.F., Tetzlaff, W., Illes, J., 2012. Expectations of benefit and
tolerance to risk of individuals with spinal cord injury regarding potential
participation in clinical trials. J. Neurotrauma 29, 2727–2737.
Lalu, M.M., McIntyre, L., Pugliese, C., Fergusson, D., Winston, B.W., Marshall, J.C., Granton,
J., Stewart, D.J., 2012. Safety of cell therapy with mesenchymal stromal cells
(SafeCell): a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. PLoS One 7,
e47559.
Lanza, C., Morando, S., Voci, A., Canesi, L., Principato, M.C., Serpero, L.D., Mancardi, G.,
Uccelli, A., Vergani, L., 2009. Neuroprotective mesenchymal stem cells are endowed
with a potent antioxidant effect in vivo. J. Neurochem. 110, 1674–1684.
Le Blanc, K., Frassoni, F., Ball, L., Locatelli, F., Roelofs, H., Lewis, I., Lanino, E., Sundberg, B.,
Bernardo, M.E., Remberger, M., Dini, G., Egeler, R.M., Bacigalupo, A., Fibbe, W.,
Ringden, O., 2008. Mesenchymal stem cells for treatment of steroid-resistant, severe,
acute graft-versus-host disease: a phase II study. Lancet 371, 1579–1586.
Li, Y., Chen, J., Chen, X.G., Wang, L., Gautam, S.C., Xu, Y.X., Katakowski, M., Zhang, L.J., Lu,
M., Janakiraman, N., Chopp, M., 2002. Human marrow stromal cell therapy for stroke
in rat: neurotrophins and functional recovery. Neurology 59, 514–523.
Li, Q.M., Fu, Y.M., Shan, Z.Y., Shen, J.L., Zhang, X.M., Lei, L., Jin, L.H., 2009. MSCs guide
neurite directional extension and promote oligodendrogenesis in NSCs. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 384, 372–377.
Li, H., Wen, Y., Luo, Y., Lan, X., Wang, D., Sun, Z., Hu, L., 2010. Transplantation of bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells into spinal cord injury: a comparison of delivery
different times. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 24, 180–184.
Lu, S., Lu, C., Han, Q., Li, J., Du, Z., Liao, L., Zhao, R.C., 2011. Adipose-derived mesenchymal
stem cells protect PC12 cells from glutamate excitotoxicity-induced apoptosis by
upregulation of XIAP through PI3-K/Akt activation. Toxicology 279, 189–195.
Malakoff, D., 2008. Clinical trials and tribulations. Spiraling costs threaten gridlock.
Science 322, 210–213.
Manochantr, S., Pratya, Y., Kheolamai, P., Rojphisan, S., Chayosumrit, M., Tantrawatpan, C.,
Supokawej, A., Issaragrisil, S., 2013. Immunosuppressive properties of mesenchymal
stromal cells derived from amnion, placenta, Wharton's jelly and umbilical cord.
Intern. Med. J. 43, 430–439.
McMahon, D.S., Thorsteinsdottir, H., Singer, P.A., Daar, A.S., 2010. Cultivating regenerative
medicine innovation in China. Regen. Med. 5, 35–44.
Metz, G.A., Curt, A., van de Meent, H., Klusman, I., Schwab, M.E., Dietz, V., 2000. Validation
of the weight-drop contusion model in rats: a comparative study of human spinal
cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 17, 1–17.
Meyerrose, T., Olson, S., Pontow, S., Kalomoiris, S., Jung, Y., Annett, G., Bauer, G., Nolta, J.A.,
2010. Mesenchymal stem cells for the sustained in vivo delivery of bioactive factors.
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 62, 1167–1174.
Middleton, J.W., Dayton, A., Walsh, J., Rutkowski, S.B., Leong, G., Duong, S., 2012. Life
expectancy after spinal cord injury: a 50-year study. Spinal Cord 50, 803–811.
Mills, C.D., Hains, B.C., Johnson, K.M., Hulsebosch, C.E., 2001. Strain and model differences
in behavioral outcomes after spinal cord injury in rat. J. Neurotrauma 18, 743–756.
Moll, G., Rasmusson-Duprez, I., von Bahr, L., Connolly-Andersen, A.M., Elgue, G.,
Funke, L., Hamad, O.A., Lonnies, H., Magnusson, P.U., Sanchez, J., Teramura, Y.,
Nilsson-Ekdahl, K., Ringden, O., Korsgren, O., Nilsson, B., Le Blanc, K., 2012. Are
therapeutic human mesenchymal stromal cells compatible with human blood?
Stem Cells 30, 1565–1574.
Morando, S., Vigo, T., Esposito, M., Casazza, S., Novi, G., Principato, M.C., Furlan, R., Uccelli,
A., 2012. The therapeutic effect of mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is mediated by peripheral and central
mechanisms. Stem. Cell Res. Ther. 3, 3.
Najar, M., Raicevic, G., Fayyad-Kazan, H., De, B.C., Bron, D., Toungouz, M., Lagneaux, L., 2012.
Immune-related antigens, surface molecules and regulatory factors in human-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells: the expression and impact of inflammatory priming. Stem
Cell Rev. 8, 1188–1198.
Nakajima, H., Uchida, K., Guerrero, A.R., Watanabe, S., Sugita, D., Takeura, N., Yoshida, A.,
Long, G., Wright, K.T., Johnson, W.E., Baba, H., 2012. Transplantation of mesenchymal
stem cells promotes an alternative pathway of macrophage activation and functional
recovery after spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 29, 1614–1625.
Nakano, N., Nakai, Y., Seo, T.B., Yamada, Y., Ohno, T., Yamanaka, A., Nagai, Y., Fukushima,
M., Suzuki, Y., Nakatani, T., Ide, C., 2010. Characterization of conditioned medium of
cultured bone marrow stromal cells. Neurosci. Lett. 483, 57–61.New, P.W., Cripps, R.A., Bonne, L.B., 2013. Global maps of non-traumatic spinal cord injury
epidemiology: towards a living data repository. Spinal Cord http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/sc.2012.165 (in press).
Nguyen, H.X., O'Barr, T.J., Anderson, A.J., 2007. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes promote
neurotoxicity through release of matrix metalloproteinases, reactive oxygen species,
and TNF-alpha. J. Neurochem. 102, 900–912.
Noble, L.J., Donovan, F., Igarashi, T., Goussev, S., Werb, Z., 2002. Matrix metalloproteinases
limit functional recovery after spinal cord injury by modulation of early vascular
events. J. Neurosci. 22, 7526–7535.
Noonan, V.K., Fingas, M., Farry, A., Baxter, D., Singh, A., Fehlings, M.G., Dvorak, M.F., 2012.
Incidence and prevalence of spinal cord injury in Canada: a national perspective.
Neuroepidemiology 38, 219–226.
O'Brien, P.C., Fleming, T.R., 1979. Amultiple testing procedure for clinical trials. Biometrics
35, 549–556.
Oliveri, R.S., 2007. Epigenetic dedifferentiation of somatic cells into pluripotency: cellular
alchemy in the age of regenerative medicine? Regen. Med. 2, 795–816.
Onifer, S.M., Rabchevsky, A.G., Scheff, S.W., 2007. Rat models of traumatic spinal cord
injury to assess motor recovery. ILAR J. 48, 385–395.
Osaka, M., Honmou, O., Murakami, T., Nonaka, T., Houkin, K., Hamada, H., Kocsis, J.D.,
2010. Intravenous administration of mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone
marrow after contusive spinal cord injury improves functional outcome. Brain Res.
1343, 226–235.
Oyinbo, C.A., 2011. Secondary injury mechanisms in traumatic spinal cord injury: a
nugget of this multiply cascade. Acta Neurobiol. Exp. (Wars) 71, 281–299.
Pal, R., Gopinath, C., Rao, N.M., Banerjee, P., Krishnamoorthy, V., Venkataramana, N.K.,
Totey, S., 2010. Functional recovery after transplantation of bone marrow-derived
human mesenchymal stromal cells in a rat model of spinal cord injury. Cytotherapy
12, 792–806.
Panagiotou, O.A., Contopoulos-Ioannidis, D.G., Ioannidis, J.P., Rehnborg, C.F., 2013.
Comparative effect sizes in randomised trials from less developed and more
developed countries: meta-epidemiological assessment. BMJ 346, f707.
Pati, S., Gerber, M.H., Menge, T.D., Wataha, K.A., Zhao, Y., Baumgartner, J.A., Zhao, J.,
Letourneau, P.A., Huby, M.P., Baer, L.A., Salsbury, J.R., Kozar, R.A., Wade, C.E., Walker,
P.A., Dash, P.K., Cox Jr., C.S., Doursout, M.F., Holcomb, J.B., 2011. Bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells inhibit inflammation and preserve vascular endothelial
integrity in the lungs after hemorrhagic shock. PLoS One 6, e25171.
Perel, P., Roberts, I., Sena, E., Wheble, P., Briscoe, C., Sandercock, P., Macleod, M., Mignini,
L.E., Jayaram, P., Khan, K.S., 2007. Comparison of treatment effects between animal
experiments and clinical trials: systematic review. BMJ 334, 197.
Pildal, J., Chan, A.W., Hrobjartsson, A., Forfang, E., Altman, D.G., Gotzsche, P.C., 2005.
Comparison of descriptions of allocation concealment in trial protocols and the
published reports: cohort study. BMJ 330, 1049.
Popovich, P.G., Wei, P., Stokes, B.T., 1997. Cellular inflammatory response after spinal cord
injury in Sprague–Dawley and Lewis rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 443–464.
Prockop, D.J., 2007. “Stemness” does not explain the repair of many tissues bymesenchymal
stem/multipotent stromal cells (MSCs). Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 82, 241–243.
Prockop, D.J., Oh, J.Y., 2012. Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs): role as guardians of
inflammation. Mol. Ther. 20, 14–20.
Prockop, D.J., Brenner, M., Fibbe, W.E., Horwitz, E., Le, B.K., Phinney, D.G., Simmons, P.J.,
Sensebe, L., Keating, A., 2010. Defining the risks of mesenchymal stromal cell therapy.
Cytotherapy 12, 576–578.
Raffaghello, L., Bianchi, G., Bertolotto, M., Montecucco, F., Busca, A., Dallegri, F., Ottonello, L.,
Pistoia, V., 2008. Human mesenchymal stem cells inhibit neutrophil apoptosis: a
model for neutrophil preservation in the bone marrow niche. Stem Cells 26, 151–162.
Regenberg, A.C., Hutchinson, L.A., Schanker, B., Mathews, D.J., 2009. Medicine on the
fringe: stem cell-based interventions in advance of evidence. Stem Cells 27,
2312–2319.
Rex, A., Kolbasenko, A., Bert, B., Fink, H., 2007. Choosing the right wild type: behavioral
and neurochemical differences between 2 populations of Sprague–Dawley rats
from the same source but maintained at different sites. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci.
46, 13–20.
Rivera, F.J., Couillard-Despres, S., Pedre, X., Ploetz, S., Caioni, M., Lois, C., Bogdahn, U.,
Aigner, L., 2006. Mesenchymal stem cells instruct oligodendrogenic fate decision on
adult neural stem cells. Stem Cells 24, 2209–2219.
Ryan, K.A., Sanders, A.N., Wang, D.D., Levine, A.D., 2010. Tracking the rise of stem cell
tourism. Regen. Med. 5, 27–33.
Sahni, V., Kessler, J.A., 2010. Stem cell therapies for spinal cord injury. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 6,
363–372.
Salter, B., Cooper, M., Dickins, A., Cardo, V., 2007. Stem cell science in India: emerging
economies and the politics of globalization. Regen. Med. 2, 75–89.
Sandercock, P., Roberts, I., 2002. Systematic reviews of animal experiments. Lancet 360,
586.
Savovic, J., Jones, H., Altman, D., Harris, R., Juni, P., Pildal, J., Als-Nielsen, B., Balk, E., Gluud,
C., Gluud, L., Ioannidis, J., Schulz, K., Beynon, R., Welton, N.,Wood, L., Moher, D., Deeks,
J., Sterne, J., 2012. Influence of reported study design characteristics on intervention
effect estimates from randomised controlled trials: combined analysis of meta-
epidemiological studies. Health Technol. Assess. 16, 1–82.
Schallmoser, K., Rohde, E., Reinisch, A., Bartmann, C., Thaler, D., Drexler, C., Obenauf, A.C.,
Lanzer, G., Linkesch, W., Strunk, D., 2008. Rapid large-scale expansion of functional
mesenchymal stem cells from unmanipulated bone marrow without animal serum.
Tissue Eng. Part C. Methods 14, 185–196.
Sedy, J., Urdzikova, L., Jendelova, P., Sykova, E., 2008. Methods for behavioral testing of
spinal cord injured rats. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32, 550–580.
Sena, E.S., van der Worp, H.B., Bath, P.M., Howells, D.W., Macleod, M.R., 2010. Publication
bias in reports of animal stroke studies leads to major overstatement of efficacy. PLoS
Biol. 8, e1000344.
Simpson, L.A., Eng, J.J., Hsieh, J.T., Wolfe, D.L., 2012. The health and life priorities of individuals
with spinal cord injury: a systematic review. J. Neurotrauma 29, 1548–1555.
Singer, N.G., Caplan, A.I., 2011. Mesenchymal stem cells: mechanisms of inflammation.
Annu. Rev. Pathol. 6, 457–478.
Soares, H.P., Daniels, S., Kumar, A., Clarke, M., Scott, C., Swann, S., Djulbegovic, B., 2004.
Bad reporting does not mean bad methods for randomised trials: observational
study of randomised controlled trials performed by the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group. BMJ 328, 22–24.
Sroga, J.M., Jones, T.B., Kigerl, K.A., McGaughy, V.M., Popovich, P.G., 2003. Rats and mice
exhibit distinct inflammatory reactions after spinal cord injury. J. Comp. Neurol.
462, 223–240.
Stammers, A.T., Liu, J., Kwon, B.K., 2012. Expression of inflammatory cytokines following
acute spinal cord injury in a rodent model. J. Neurosci. Res. 90, 782–790.
Steffenhagen, C., Dechant, F.X., Oberbauer, E., Furtner, T., Weidner, N., Kury, P., Aigner, L.,
Rivera, F.J., 2012. Mesenchymal stem cells prime proliferating adult neural
progenitors toward an oligodendrocyte fate. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 1838–1851.
Suarez-Almazor, M.E., Belseck, E., Homik, J., Dorgan, M., Ramos-Remus, C., 2000.
Identifying clinical trials in the medical literature with electronic databases:
MEDLINE alone is not enough. Control. Clin. Trials 21, 476–487.
Tan, J., Wu,W., Xu, X., Liao, L., Zheng, F., Messinger, S., Sun, X., Chen, J., Yang, S., Cai, J., Gao,
X., Pileggi, A., Ricordi, C., 2012. Induction therapywith autologousmesenchymal stem
cells in living-related kidney transplants: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 307,
1169–1177.
Tator, C.H., Hashimoto, R., Raich, A., Norvell, D., Fehlings, M.G., Harrop, J.S., Guest, J., Aarabi,
B., Grossman, R.G., 2012. Translational potential of preclinical trials of neuroprotection
through pharmacotherapy for spinal cord injury. J. Neurosurg. Spine 17, 157–229.
Teixeira, F.G., Carvalho, M.M., Sousa, N., Salgado, A.J., 2013. Mesenchymal stem cells
secretome: a new paradigm for central nervous system regeneration? Cell. Mol. Life
Sci. 70, 3871–3882.
Uccelli, A., Moretta, L., Pistoia, V., 2008. Mesenchymal stem cells in health and disease.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 726–736.
Uccelli, A., Milanese, M., Principato, M.C., Morando, S., Bonifacino, T., Vergani, L., Giunti, D.,
Voci, A., Carminati, E., Giribaldi, F., Caponnetto, C., Bonanno, G., 2012. Intravenous
mesenchymal stem cells improve survival and motor function in experimental
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Mol. Med. 18, 794–804.
Vaquero, J., Zurita, M., Oya, S., Santos, M., 2006. Cell therapy using bone marrow stromal
cells in chronic paraplegic rats: systemic or local administration? Neurosci. Lett. 398,
129–134.
Varawalla, N., 2007. India's growing clinical research sector: opportunity for global
companies. IDrugs 10, 391–394.
Vesterinen, H.M., Sena, E.S., ffrench-Constant, C., Williams, A., Chandran, S., Macleod, M.R.,
2010. Improving the translational hit of experimental treatments in multiple
sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 16, 1044–1055.
Vickers, A., Goyal, N., Harland, R., Rees, R., 1998. Do certain countries produce only
positive results? A systematic review of controlled trials. Control. Clin. Trials 19,
159–166.
von Bahr, L., Batsis, I., Moll, G., Hagg, M., Szakos, A., Sundberg, B., Uzunel, M., Ringden, O.,
Le, B.K., 2012. Analysis of tissues following mesenchymal stromal cell therapy in
humans indicates limited long-term engraftment and no ectopic tissue formation.
Stem Cells 30, 1575–1578.
Voulgari-Kokota, A., Fairless, R., Karamita, M., Kyrargyri, V., Tseveleki, V., Evangelidou, M.,
Delorme, B., Charbord, P., Diem, R., Probert, L., 2012. Mesenchymal stem cells protect
CNS neurons against glutamate excitotoxicity by inhibiting glutamate receptor
expression and function. Exp. Neurol. 236, 161–170.
Wetterslev, J., Thorlund, K., Brok, J., Gluud, C., 2008. Trial sequential analysismay establish
when firm evidence is reached in cumulative meta-analysis. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 61,
64–75.
Wetterslev, J., Thorlund, K., Brok, J., Gluud, C., 2009. Estimating required information size
by quantifying diversity in random-effects model meta-analyses. BMC Med. Res.
353R.S. Oliveri et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 62 (2014) 338–353therapy in acute myocardial infarction. An overview of results from randomized
controlled trials. JAMA 270, 1589–1595.
Tetzlaff, W., Okon, E.B., Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S., Hill, C.E., Sparling, J.S., Plemel, J.R., Plunet,
W.T., Tsai, E.C., Baptiste, D., Smithson, L.J., Kawaja, M.D., Fehlings, M.G., Kwon, B.K.,
2011. A systematic review of cellular transplantation therapies for spinal cord injury.
J. Neurotrauma 28, 1611–1682.
Thompson, S.G., Higgins, J.P., 2002. How should meta-regression analyses be undertaken
and interpreted? Stat. Med. 21, 1559–1573.
Thorlund, K., Devereaux, P.J., Wetterslev, J., Guyatt, G., Ioannidis, J.P., Thabane, L., Gluud,
L.L., Als-Nielsen, B., Gluud, C., 2009. Can trial sequential monitoring boundaries
reduce spurious inferences from meta-analyses? Int. J. Epidemiol. 38, 276–286.
Thorlund, K., Imberger, G., Walsh, M., Chu, R., Gluud, C., Wetterslev, J., Guyatt, G.,
Devereaux, P.J., Thabane, L., 2011. The number of patients and events required to
limit the risk of overestimation of intervention effects in meta-analysis—a simulation
study. PLoS One 6, e25491.
Trivedi, A., Olivas, A.D., Noble-Haeusslein, L.J., 2006. Inflammation and spinal cord injury:
infiltrating leukocytes as determinants of injury and repair processes. Clin. Neurosci.
Res. 6, 283–292.
Trojahn Kølle, S.F., Oliveri, R.S., Glovinski, P.V., Kirchoff, M., Mathiasen, A.B., Elberg, J.J.,
Andersen, P.S., Drzewiecki, T.D., Fischer-Nielsen, A., 2013. Pooled human platelet
lysate versus fetal bovine serum—investigating the proliferation rate, chromosome
stability and angiogenic potential of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells
intended for clinical use. Cytotherapy 15, 1086–1097.
Uccelli, A., 2013. Mesenchymal stem cells exert a remarkable regenerative effect requiring
minimal CNS integration. Exp. Neurol. 247, 292–295.Methodol. 9, 86.
Wood, L., Egger, M., Gluud, L.L., Schulz, K.F., Juni, P., Altman, D.G., Gluud, C., Martin, R.M.,
Wood, A.J., Sterne, J.A., 2008. Empirical evidence of bias in treatment effect estimates
in controlled trials with different interventions and outcomes: meta-epidemiological
study. BMJ 336, 601–605.
Wright, K.T., El Masri, W., Osman, A., Roberts, S., Chamberlain, G., Ashton, B.A., Johnson,
W.E., 2007. Bone marrow stromal cells stimulate neurite outgrowth over neural
proteoglycans (CSPG), myelin associated glycoprotein and Nogo-A. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 354, 559–566.
Wright, K.T., El Masri, W., Osman, A., Chowdhury, J., Johnson,W.E., 2011. Bonemarrow for
the treatment of spinal cord injury: mechanisms and clinical applications. Stem Cells
29, 169–178.
Wu, T., Li, Y., Bian, Z., Liu, G., Moher, D., 2009. Randomized trials published in some
Chinese journals: how many are randomized? Trials 10, 46.
Yuan, W., Sipp, D., Wang, Z.Z., Deng, H., Pei, D., Zhou, Q., Cheng, T., 2012. Stem cell science
on the rise in China. Cell Stem Cell 10, 12–15.
Zhang, Q.Z., Su, W.R., Shi, S.H., Wilder-Smith, P., Xiang, A.P., Wong, A., Nguyen, A.L., Kwon,
C.W., Le, A.D., 2010. Human gingiva-derived mesenchymal stem cells elicit
polarization of M2 macrophages and enhance cutaneous wound healing. Stem Cells
28, 1856–1868.
Zhang, D., Freemantle, N., Cheng, K.K., 2011. Are randomized trials conducted in China or
India biased? A comparative empirical analysis. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 64, 90–95.
Zhou, C., Zhang, C., Chi, S., Xu, Y., Teng, J., Wang, H., Song, Y., Zhao, R., 2009. Effects of
human marrow stromal cells on activation of microglial cells and production of
inflammatory factors induced by lipopolysaccharide. Brain Res. 1269, 23–30.Teo, K.K., Yusuf, S., Furberg, C.D., 1993. Effects of prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug
