REVIEW PAPER
Cellular Transplantation-Based Evolving Treatment Options
in Spinal Cord Injury
Mao-cheng Wu • Hu Yuan • Kang-jie Li •
De-Lai Qiu
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
Abstract Spinal cord injury (SCI) often represents a
condition of permanent neurologic deficit. It has been
possible to understand and delineate the mechanisms con-
tributing to loss of function following primary injury. The
clinicians might hope to improve the outcome in SCI injury
by designing treatment strategies that could target these
secondary mechanisms of response to injury. However, the
approaches like molecular targeting of the neurons or
surgical interventions have yielded very limited success till
date. In recent times, a great thrust is put on to the cellular
transplantation mode of treatment strategies to combat SCI
problems so as to gain maximum functional recovery. In
this review, we discuss about the various cellular trans-
plantation strategies that could be employed in the treat-
ment of SCI. The success of such cellular approaches
involving Schwann cells, olfactory ensheathing cells,
peripheral nerve, embryonic CNS tissue and activated
macrophage has been supported by a number of reports and
has been detailed here. Many of these cell transplantation
strategies have reached the clinical trial stages. Also, the
evolving field of stem cell therapy has made it possible to
contemplate the role of both embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cells to stimulate the
differentiation of neurons when transplanted in SCI mod-
els. Moreover, the roles of tissue engineering techniques
and synthetic biomaterials have also been explained with
their beneficial and deleterious effects. Many of these cell-
based therapeutic approaches have been able to cause only
a little change in recovery and a combinatorial approach
involving more than one strategy are now being tried out to
successfully treat SCI and improve functional recovery.
Keywords Spinal cord injury (SCI)  Cellular
transplantation  Neurologic deficit  Stem cell therapy
Introduction
In the USA and other developed countries, it has been
demonstrated that nearly 10–40 persons per annum per
million populations are affected by SCI according to the
epidemiologic research [1]. Many of the individuals sus-
taining SCI are young who are at the peak of their earning
potential and personal lives or even older individuals get-
ting injured by falls. The consequences of the neurologic
injury is quite significant in either of the cases that has
urged the scientific community to research for under-
standing the pathophysiological mechanisms associated
with SCI so as to devise novel therapeutic strategies. A
clear understanding about the root of secondary SCI
mechanisms can form the basis of such strategies [2].
Neural element damage sustained during trauma is referred
to as the primary SCI that generally causes irreversible
injury and results from shear forces to blood vessels and
axons. The body responses to the primary injury and is
referred to as the secondary injury. A plethora of cellular
events take place immediately following injury and exists
for months to years [3]. These normal cellular events have
M. Wu  H. Yuan  K. Li
Department of Osteology, Affiliated Hospital of Yanbian
University, Yanji, Jilin, China
M. Wu  D.-L. Qiu (&)
Cellular Function Research Center, Yanbian University, 977
GongYuan Road, Yanji, Jilin 133002, China
e-mail: dlqiudo@163.com
D.-L. Qiu
Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, College
of Medicine, Yanbian University, 977 GongYuan Road, Yanji,
Jilin 133002, China
123
Cell Biochem Biophys
DOI 10.1007/s12013-014-0174-3
been established to be an important part in inhibiting
neurologic recovery and exacerbate underlying injury [4].
The researchers have now been able to demonstrate the
significance of these cellular cascades and establish sec-
ondary SCI mitigating targets with patient outcome
improving potential in SCI [5]. With such background,
crucial advancements have been made in both operative
and non-operative treatment modalities. Although there are
a few reviews that discusses about the therapeutics in
treating SCI, no such single review detailing the recent
cellular transplantation-based treatment strategies in SCI
could be found. In this review, we outline the various
cellular transplantation strategies that could be effectively
used in the treatment and control of SCI. A number of
reports have supported the success of cellular approaches
involving peripheral nerve, Schwann cells, embryonic CNS
tissue, olfactory ensheathing cells and activated macro-
phages in SCI and have been detailed here. Subsequently,
clinical trials are now underway with a number of these cell
transplantation strategies. Also, stem cell therapy has come
up as an evolving field in this regard and researchers have
contemplated the role of both induced pluripotent stem
cells and embryonic stem cells to induce the differentiation
of neurons when transplanted in SCI models with no ter-
atoma formation. In addition, the roles of synthetic bio-
materials and tissue engineering techniques have been
explained focusing on their both deleterious and beneficial
aspects. The success achieved with these cell transplanta-
tion methods in treating SCI under in vitro conditions and
in animal models augurs well for the future of SCI treat-
ment that can only be verified with long-term clinical trials.
Cellular Transplantation
There are a number of important issues to be solved by
cellular transplantation in treating spinal cord injury that
include creation of a favorable axon regeneration envi-
ronment, dead cell replacement (e.g., providing new or
myelinating neurons) and bridging of any existing cavities
or cysts.
Schwann Cells
Peripheral nerve derived Schwann cells have been trans-
planted into the SCI rat models, implanted into the extra-
cellular matrix containing channels post-complete
transection or lateral hemisection or post-contusion injury
and injected as suspensions [6, 7]. After the completion of
Schwann cell implantation and transection, these bridge
gaps are traversed by the extension of the cell body con-
sisting spinal and sensory axons. Subsequently, myelinating
and electrophysiological activities are detected while the
regenerated axons do not reinnervate the host by leaving the
grafts distally. Following Schwann cell implantation and
contusion, extension of spinal and sensory axons into the
grafts takes place with myelination and a concomitant
reduction in cavitation [6]. Although some of the studies
reported for hindlimb function recovery, the fact was not
confirmed by others [8]. As a result of such observations,
combinatorial therapeutic approaches have been evaluated.
Beyond bridges, increased CNS axon regeneration has been
demonstrated with thoracic transection in response to
Schwann cell transplantation along with olfactory en-
sheathing glia, steroid (methylprednisolone sodium succi-
nate) or neurotrophin delivery [9, 10]. SCI rat models with
attenuated immune system have also been transplanted with
human Schwann cells where spinal axons extended distal to
grafts while the brainstem axons resulted in graft regener-
ation. There are reports of functional improvements with
limited cases of weight-supported stepping [11]. So, the
determination of the most effective and efficacious Schw-
ann cell involved combinatorial therapy that is safe and
reproducible remains the key aspect of the cellular trans-
plantation. The safety and effectiveness of these methods
can be analyzed from the transplantation of the autologous
Schwann cells into contusive SCI non-human primates
which could culminate into human clinical trials [12]. There
is yet no report on the human clinical trials that involve
Schwann cell transplantation following SCI.
Olfactory Ensheathing Cells
Under laboratory conditions, olfactory ensheathing cells
(OECs) have been reportedly isolated from Fischer rat pulps
or Sprague–Dawley olfactory bulbs with the help of marker
antibodies and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
[13]. The maintenance and growth of purified OECs in large
numbers can be obtained from mitogen mixture of heregulin
b1, forskolin, FGF2 and confluent cortical astrocyte culture-
conditioned serum-free medium [14]. Upon immediate cul-
ture of the OECS purified with FACS, inhibition of apoptosis
is possible, proliferating for 12 days and then differentiating
into two subtypes [15]. Different morphological and anti-
genic characteristics are exhibited by these subtypes, with
one resembling the astrocytes and the other Schwann cells
[16]. Astrocyte-like OECs show higher expression of glial
fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity (GFAP-IR) and
embryonic form of neural cell adhesion molecule (ENCAM)
with a flat morphology. However, the cells express no or little
p75NTR, the non-myelin Schwann cell marker [17]. The
NCAM polysialylated isoform, ENCAM, has been detected
in those adult cells that seem to retain embryonic features,
e.g., hypothalamoneurohypophysial system astrocytes [18].
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
The expression of polysialyic acid by NCAM marks for
reduced adhesive properties that is associated with the
required cellular rearrangements during plasticity and neu-
rohistogenesis [19]. On the other hand, the OECs with
Schwann cell-like features exhibit higher p75NTR levels
with little or negligible ENCAM and diffused levels of
GFAP-IR with the cells showing spindle-shaped morphol-
ogy [17]. It is highly probable that other OEC subtypes are
present in culture that can show dramatic ability of changing
size and shape while exhibiting considerable cellular plas-
ticity [16].
Peripheral Nerve Transplantation
Autologous peripheral transplantation in SCI adult rats
resulted in supporting various types of axonal growth but
not the supraspinal axon. Thirty-five peripheral nerve grafts
along with a host of other therapies (e.g., vertebral wiring,
anti-inflammatory drugs, acidic fibroblast growth factor
and fibrin glue) aid in promoting recovery besides facili-
tating supraspinal axon regeneration through and beyond
grafts [20, 21]. Similar kind of approach has been taken
following lateral spinal hemisection in non-human prima-
tes [22]. Although hardly any functional difference could
be detected, after 4 months SCI regeneration of some of the
spinal axons was found. The method has been applied in
treating incomplete, chronic human SCI with a report for
restricted functional recovery. This observation was dem-
onstrated in one patient, but the study did not include any
control patient [23]. However, the procedure was found to
be unsuccessful in complete SCI patients. Therefore, in
order to define the role of the peripheral nerve bridge
grafting, a lot of work is to be done so as to effectively
cause improvements in outcome in SCI patients.
Embryonic CNS Tissue
Following fetal spinal cord transplantation into the site of
lesion and spinal cord transection in animal models, the
number of host axon regeneration into the transplant is
small and termination is observed near the transplant border
of the host [10]. However, although small but significant
recovery in function has been observed in cats and rats [24].
The recovery is not dependent on long distance growth
through, beyond and into the grafts. Some of the researchers
are of the opinion that in fact it is brought about by the
relaying activities of the transplants that makes the neuronal
signal transmission affordable in turn innervated by host
proximal neurons and projecting to host distal neurons. The
grafts might also be useful in improving conduction and
providing growth factors to the spared neurons [10]. In adult
rats, upon fetal spinal cord transplantation in combination
with the delivery of neurotrophin factors following com-
plete spinal cord transection, functional recovery has been
observed [25] where the growth of caudal spinal cord has
been found from some propriospinal and supraspinal axons.
In a clinical trial with syringomyelia patients, fetal spinal
cord intraspinal transplantation has been tested with cyst
obliteration in all the patients and no associated complica-
tions [26, 27]. Although these studies provided promising
insights into the SCI treatment modalities, they have not
been able to provide a marked improvement in the SCI or
syringomyelia treatment standards, perhaps due to the
problems faced in procuring fetal tissues for transplantation.
Activated Macrophages
It has now been known that the macrophages play an
important role in spinal cord repair, and the failure in SCI
repair can be largely associated with the kind of macrophage
response achieved [28]. Following transection and activated
macrophage transplantation (incubated with skin tissue or
PNS), hindlimb function recovery in rats has been achieved.
The extension of the fibers through the lesions took place
while spinal cord re-transection led to abolishment of pre-
vious functional recovery [29]. But the recovery rate was
comparable to that achieved with other cell-type transplan-
tations [30]. On the other hand, the intrinsic macrophage
activation via a proinflammatory agent injection at the spinal
contusion site exerts negative effects on tissue survival and
functional recovery of hindlimb. On the contrary, macro-
phage depletion has led to extensive white matter sparing,
better hindlimb usage during overground locomotion and
reduced tissue cavitation [31]. Therefore, it can be concluded
that the macrophages can be both beneficial as well delete-
rious in providing recovery of function which makes it
necessary for more in-depth studies with the macrophages
directed at SCI treatment. Till now, no peer reviewed report
involving non-human primates for activated macrophage
transplantation has been available. In Israel and Belgium,
Proneuron has sponsored the clinical trials (Phase I; from
2000 to 2003) of activated macrophage transplantation in
humans. Blood-derived monocytes that have been activated
with biopsied skin were used for transplantation in SCI
patients who showed no irresolvable adverse effects [32].
Currently, a randomized controlled, multicentre, clinical
trial (Phase II) is underway at USA and Israel hospitals.
Stem Cell Transplantation (18)
The spinal cord and the brain, the components of the
central nervous system (CNS), have long been considered
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
as examples of organs where the regeneration has been
found to be difficult. However, this notion has been dis-
proved by large with the recent advancements made in the
field of stem cell biology. First identified in 1992 by
Reynolds and Weiss [33], the culturing methods for neural
stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) from mammals including
humans have now been well established. Similarly, an
increased interest has been evoked in induced pluripotent
stem cells following the success of Sir John Gurdon and
Shinya Yamanaka [34] who received the Nobel Prize for
Physiology or Medicine in 2012. In the repair and regen-
eration in spinal cord injury cases, the transplantation of
both the embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells has
been contemplated.
ESC-Derived NS/PCs (18)
Neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) are characterized as
cells with multipotentiality and self-renewal capacity. But
the rate of proliferation and differentiation of the cells is
strictly controlled depending upon the localization and
exact stage of their production. It has been observed that
the characteristics of the NS/PCs vary to a large extent.
Generally, the NS/PCs exist around the 5th day of
embryogenesis and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) can be
used to culture the NS/PCs from this stage [35]. However,
if the NS/PCs are procured on the 8th day of embryogen-
esis, they can be cultured with fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF-2) in vitro. The ventricle surrounding radial glial
cells from this stage up to the stages of late embryogenesis
can be the NS/PC source, and these cells can give rise to
neuronal cells by asymmetric divisions and self-renew by
symmetric divisions [36, 37]. In the adult brain, the NS/
PCs exist majorly around the ventricles up to the neonatal
stage from the late developmental stage and differentiate
into glial cells (oligodendrocytes and astrocytes) besides
differentiating into neuronal cells [38]. Both FGF-2 and
epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulate NS/PC prolifer-
ation in the late embryonic stages. The NS/PCs appearing
after the late embryonic stages are unable to give rise to
early-born neuronal projections like motor neurons, dopa-
minergic neurons and forebrain cholinergic neurons.
Highly plastic NS/PC development could be induced by
Okada et al. [39] using the ESCs from the mouse inner cell
mass from the early developmental stages. They succeeded
in establishing a culture system that mimicked spatial and
temporal developmental specificity. In this system of cul-
ture, first of all LIF (required in the maintenance of
undifferentiated state) is removed and the ESCs are
maintained in suspension culture so as to form embryoid
bodies (EBs) constituted by the three germ layer cells. The
relatively early stage NS/PCs present in these EBs can be
maintained as neurospheres selectively in suspension cul-
tures in the presence of FGF-2 in serum-free medium.
Besides, during EB formation, addition of Noggin that
plays a critical role in the formation of retinoic acid (a
known player in the development of anterior spinal cord
and hindbrain as well as in neural induction) or forebrain
by preventing BMP-mediated differentiation promotion
into neuroepithelium at low concentration increases EB
constituting NS/PCs, thereby enhancing the neurosphere
forming efficiency. Secondary and tertiary neurospheres
can be generated from the passaging of primary neuro-
spheres. It is noteworthy to mention that while the induc-
tion of tertiary and secondary neurospheres give rise to
glial cells like oligodendrocytes besides the neurons, the
primary neurospheres can generate only neurons upon
induction. These neurospheres derived form mouse ESCs
show increased multipotentiality and self-renewal capacity
as their repeated passage results in the generation of
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons. Moreover, CNS
early developmental stages are well reflected with the
change observed in the capacity of differentiation
depending on the passaging of the cultures wherein earlier
passaged neurospheres give rise to only neurons while glial
cells are developed after the mid-gestation period for the
first time. During EB formation, retinoic acid and Noggin
concentration modulation can control the induced NS/PC
regional specificity along the anteroposterior axis. While
during primary neurosphere formation, dorsalizing factors
such as Wnt3a and BMP4 and ventralizing factors like
Sonic Hedgehog can be successfully used in the regulation
of regional specificity along the dorsoventral axis [39].
These results go on to indicate that NS/PC regional spec-
ificity can be controlled by appropriate factor addition
during specific stages of differentiation induction.
Neurospheres Derived from iPSC
The establishment of iPSC by Yamanaka et al. has paved
the path for the development of novel therapeutic strategies
in the treatment of many diseases. Induced pluripotent stem
cells are generated by the reprogramming of somatic cells
following the introduction of Klf4, Oct4, Sox2 and c-Myc
genes into human/mouse fibroblasts [34]. The resultant
cells show differentiation and proliferative ability almost
similar to that of the ESCs. Moreover, iPSCs can be an
answer to problems like immunological rejection and eth-
ical issues since these cells could easily be established from
patient somatic cells. However, greater challenges like
tumorigenesis might be associated with iPSCs as compared
to ESCs due to (i) the introduction of foreign genes into
chromosomes, (ii) that reprogramming may be incomplete.
The safety of the mouse iPSCs following transplantation
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
and their neural differentiation depend greatly on the
somatic cells from which the iPSCs have been derived [40].
In this study, thirty-six mouse iPSCs were established and
transplanted into the NOD/SCID mice as neurospheres
after being differentiated into neural lineages so as to
detect their safety post-transplantation and differentiation
capacity in vivo. Neurospheres so derived from the iPSCs
were proceeded for FACS analysis which showed great
degree of variation in the percentage of undifferentiated
Nanog-EGFP ? cells and depended on the iPSC generat-
ing source somatic cells [40]. However, the neurospheres
generated from MEF-derived iPSCs exhibited the presence
of no undifferentiated cells with differentiation potential
almost equivalent to that of the ESCs upon induction. Also,
the rate of teratoma formation in the mouse group trans-
planted with MEF-iPSC neurospheres was similar to that in
the ESC-derived neurosphere transplanted group. Gastric
epithelial cell-derived iPSCs showed no teratoma forma-
tion when transplanted as neurospheres into the mice.
However, the iPSCs derived form adult tail tips fibroblast
(TTF) exhibited the presence of significant number of
undifferentiated cells in the neurospheres with resistance to
differentiation upon induction. Subsequently, such neuro-
spheres when transplanted into mice died becoming weaker
within a short period of time due to the high rate of tera-
toma formation. Intermediate response (between TTF-iPSC
and MEF-iPSC) to teratoma formation and differentiation
were observed with the iPSCs derived form adult hepato-
cytes. Such differences in iPSC differentiation capacity
based on the source of somatic cells from where they are
derived may be attributed to the epigenetic memory, i.e.,
the genetic profile of the genes remained to be expressed
that requires further detailed analysis of these cells.
Tissue Engineering
Tissue engineering comes as a highly promising and
exciting procedure in the treatment of SCI. It generally
consists of three factors: seed cell, growth factor and the
scaffold. For achieving a successful repair, the appropriate
selection of growth factor, scaffold and seed cell is very
important. While selecting the seed cell, it has been
observed that the adipose tissue-derived adult stem cells
are more appropriate as compared to embryonic stem cells,
neuronal stem cells and fibroblasts. Similarly, natural
component-derived scaffolds are found to be more effec-
tive as compared to those formed of synthetic and artificial
materials [41]. It has been established that the use of
blending materials composed of synthetic and natural
materials can decrease the problems associated with the use
of natural or synthetic materials alone. Similarly, the
importance of the growth factor lies in its repairing action,
specifically as the virus carrier-mediated transfection of the
stem cells leads to consistent growth factor gene expression
[42]. It has been hypothesized accordingly that a combi-
natorial approach using more than one growth factor is
useful in this regard. Therefore, the study of virus con-
structs carrying several genes together requires further
attention. Although the technique of tissue engineering can
be regarded highly promising in SCI treatment, further
extensive works are required in order to achieve successful
SCI treatment with the method.
Synthetic Biomaterials
One of the major factors that contribute to the SCI con-
tinuance is the problem with regeneration of the damaged
axons interfering with the axonal circuit re-establishment
involved in function. Different research groups are working
toward addressing the issue of lack of regenerating axons
in SCI. The latest development in this field have been the
emergence of biomaterials as regenerating materials that
calls for increased level of collaborative work between the
clinicians, basic and translational researchers for effective
therapy development in SCI. A number of available bio-
materials have been tested in the SCI models [43, 44]. The
biomaterials may provide their effects by acting as a
structural support as well as provide factors for the pro-
motion of axonal growth by preventing growth inhibition.
The specific needs of the damaged CNS can be addressed
by appropriate designing of the materials with the current
updated technology. Although, a number of biomaterial is
available with the potential to be used in SCI repair, they
come with their own sets of pros and cons upon incorpo-
ration into the site of injury. The most important thing to
consider is that the specific needs of the injury should be
the ultimate determining factor while selecting a bioma-
terial for the repair of spinal cord. In humans, contusion
which is found associated with more than 75 percent of all
SCI cases is regarded as the most clinically relevant injury.
It has been found subsequently that in situ injectable gel-
ling materials possess potential to be applied in clinical
treatment procedures [43]. The materials can be injected at
either the adjacent or epicenter of the site of lesion directly
without causing very little additional damage. However,
while using the gelling materials, it should be kept in mind
that the material should have very low immunogenicity
along with reliable sterilization techniques. Although the
synthetic polymers could be sterilized quite safely, there is
some concern associated with the reliability of the natural
polymer sterilization. In addition, the material should be
slowly biodegraded with time as naturally regenerated
environment replaces it. It has been demonstrated that
PEG-based hydrogels can fulfill most of the
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
aforementioned criteria [45]. With its innate reactive oxy-
gen species sequestering ability, it is highly probable that
this group of in situ gelling materials can make the required
progress so as to provide important contribution in SCI
therapy development.
Neurotrophic Growth Factor (10)
Since, the neurotrophic factors promote axon regeneration
and protect neuronal cells, they have an important role to
play in the functional recovery after SCI [46]. The neuro-
trophic factors are subdivided into growth factors, neuro-
trophins, cytokines, neurotrophic factor derived from glial
cell lines and ciliary neurotrophic factor [47]. The most
commonly used neurotrophic factors include BDNF, NT3
and NGF. Discovered in the 1950s, NGF has been found to
be a core factor in the peripheral innervation regulation
with an impact on CNS as well [48]. It was demonstrated
by Allen et al. that NGF can serve as an effective option of
therapy in neurodegeneration [49]. Simultaneously, other
works showed that porcine brain extracted BDNF can elicit
a broad spectrum effect on the central and peripheral
neurons. However, such effects could not be found in the
hippocampal neurons, sensory neurons, motor neurons,
ciliary ganglion neurons, midbrain dopaminergic neurons,
basal forebrain cholinergic neurons and cerebellar neurons
[50]. The biological effects of BDNF are mainly exerted by
its binding and activation of TrkB [51]. It was also found
that agarose scaffold incorporated with BDNF when
implanted in SCI rat model could cause the regeneration of
axons through the scaffold in a linear fashion [52]. NT-3 on
the other hand, besides maintaining the sympathetic neu-
rons, motor neurons and differentiation of dopaminergic
neurons, promotes the in vitro nerve outgrowth and main-
tains the survival of sensory and sympathetic neurons [53].
The only gene to be regarded to play a role in the pro-
motion of cortico-spinal tract growth after SCI is NT-3.
NT-3 exerts its biological effects mainly by its activation
and binding of TrkC. It also shows some effects with TrkA
and TrkB which are apparently weaker as compared to its
role with TrkC [54]. The application of neurotrophic fac-
tors may be brought about by the three following methods:
gene modification, cerebrospinal fluid injection and local
injection [55]. However, gene modification seems to be the
most important among these methods. There are studies
that have shown marked improvements in functional
recovery upon the neurotrophic growth factor administra-
tion as compared to the control sets where no such growth
factor administration was done. But the treatment method
could not fully produce the desired effects of nerve gen-
eration owing to a number of limiting factors like short
half-life, time limitation and concentration [56]. Similarly,
the injection of cerebrospinal fluid poses some disadvan-
tages since it is not possible to limit the neurotrophic factor
to only the site of injury as also a reduced recovery rate is
associated with the method as compared to the other pro-
cedures. So, increased attention is paid toward the devel-
opment and upgradation of gene modification [57]. Gene
therapy in SCI cases can be employed by two methods:
cell-mediated gene therapy and transfer of the gene directly
to human body target cell. Cell-mediated gene therapy
requires transferring of the target gene into a proper
transplant cell. The cell selection is based on the high gene
expression levels and the cell transplantation into the target
tissue. Accordingly, the researchers have tried to modify
Schwann cells, muscle cells and fibroblast cells for the
transplantation into the injured region. Such cells which
have been modified genetically may promote nerve
regeneration by the continued expression of nutritional
factors. The vectors used for the transfer of gene can be
non-viral or viral [58]. Viral vectors involve chronic
viruses, retroviruses and adenoviruses among which
chronic viruses and retroviruses are of major interest since
their application in the transfer of genes into the host
genome results in long-term expression. The detection of
the effect of a chronic virus-mediated exogenous gene
transfer into adipose stem cells is possible if the cells
undergo adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation. Hence,
the efficiency of chronic virus carrier and stem cell com-
binations is currently under investigation [59]. However,
the application of the method clinically can be made sim-
pler if the growth factors are made to be released from
scaffolds slowly with the aid of biomaterial-based pro-
tracted release of the loaded proteins as compared to the
ones delivered by gene transfer.
Conclusion
There has been very limited cure in the devastating con-
dition of SCI. Molecular and rehabilitating therapies have
been tried out with very little success in the recovery in
SCI. Recently, cellular transplantations have been used
either singly or in combination with molecular therapeutic
agents that have produced significant improvements in SCI
cases. Many such therapeutic approaches are now moving
toward the clinical trial stages. Upon completion of these
clinical trials, it can be ascertained whether these cell
transplantation methods can be used in the functional
recovery in SCI. Nonetheless, the laboratory success cou-
pled with the results obtained in animal models of SCI, the
cell transplantation creates a great deal of interest in
improving the outcome in SCI. Now, it is to be seen
whether the initial success achieved gets translated under
clinical conditions as well.
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
References
1. Schinkel, C., Frangen, T. M., Kmetic, A., Andress, H. J., & Muhr,
G. (2006). Timing of thoracic spine stabilization in trauma
patients: impact on clinical course and outcome. Journal of
Trauma, 61, 156–160.
2. Oyinbo, C. A. (2011). Secondary injury mechanisms in traumatic
spinal cord injury: a nugget of this multiply cascade. Acta Neu-
robiologiae Experimentalis (Warsaw), 71, 281–299.
3. Profyris, C., Cheema, S. S., Zang, D., Azari, M. F., Boyle, K., &
Petratos, S. (2004). Degenerative and regenerative mechanisms
governing spinal cord injury. Neurobiology of Diseases, 15,
415–436.
4. Dumont, R. J., Okonkwo, D. O., Verma, S., Hurlbert, R. J., Bo-
ulos, P. T., Ellegala, D. B., et al. (2001). Acute spinal cord injury,
part I: pathophysiologic mechanisms. Clinical Neuropharmacol-
ogy, 24, 254–264.
5. Tator, C. H., & Fehlings, M. G. (1991). Review of the secondary
injury theory of acute spinal cord trauma with emphasis on
vascular mechanisms. Journal of Neurosurgery, 75, 15–26.
6. Takami, T., Oudega, M., Bates, M. L., Wood, P. M., Kleitman,
N., & Bunge, M. B. (2002). Schwann cell but not olfactory en-
sheathing glia transplants improve hindlimb locomotor perfor-
mance in the moderately contused adult rat thoracic spinal cord.
Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 6670–6681.
7. Xu, X. M., Guenard, V., Kleitman, N., & Bunge, M. B. (1995).
Axonal regeneration into Schwann cell-seeded guidance channels
grafted into transected adult rat spinal cord. Journal of Com-
parative Neurology, 351, 145–160.
8. Pearse, D. D., Sanchez, A. R., Pereira, F. C., Andrade, C. M.,
Puzis, R., Pressman, Y., et al. (2007). Transplantation of Schw-
ann cells and/or olfactory ensheathing glia into the contused
spinal cord: survival, migration, axon association, and functional
recovery. Glia, 55, 976–1000.
9. Pearse, D. D., Marcillo, A. E., Oudega, M., Lynch, M. P., Wood,
P. M., & Bunge, M. B. (2004). Transplantation of Schwann cells
and olfactory ensheathing glia after spinal cord injury: does
pretreatment with methylprednisolone and interleukin-10
enhance recovery? Journal of Neurotrauma, 21, 1223–1239.
10. Bregman, B. S., Coumans, J. V., Dai, H. N., Kuhn, P. L., Lyns-
key, J., McAtee, M., et al. (2002). Transplants and neurotrophic
factors increase regeneration and recovery of function after spinal
cord injury. Progress in Brain Research, 137, 257–273.
11. Guest, J. D., Rao, A., Olson, L., Bunge, M. B., & Bunge, R. P.
(1997). The ability of human Schwann cell grafts to promote
regeneration in the transected nude rat spinal cord. Experimental
Neurology, 148, 502–522.
12. Iwanami, A., Yamane, J., Katoh, H., Nakamura, M., Momoshima,
S., Ishii, H., et al. (2005). Establishment of graded spinal cord
injury model in a nonhuman primate: the common marmoset.
Journal of Neuroscience Research, 80, 172–181.
13. Barnett, S. C., Franklin, R. J., & Blakemore, W. F. (1993).
In vitro and in vivo analysis of a rat bipotential O-2A progenitor
cell line containing the temperature-sensitive mutant gene of the
SV40 large T antigen. European Journal of Neuroscience, 5,
1247–1260.
14. Barnett, S. C., & Riddell, J. S. (2004). Olfactory ensheathing cells
(OECs) and the treatment of CNS injury: advantages and possible
caveats. Journal of Anatomy, 204, 57–67.
15. Thompson, R. J., Roberts, B., Alexander, C. L., Williams, S. K.,
& Barnett, S. C. (2000). Comparison of neuregulin-1 expression
in olfactory ensheathing cells, Schwann cells and astrocytes.
Journal of Neuroscience Research, 61, 172–185.
16. Vincent, A. J., Taylor, J. M., Choi-Lundberg, D. L., West, A. K.,
& Chuah, M. I. (2005). Genetic expression profile of olfactory
ensheathing cells is distinct from that of Schwann cells and
astrocytes. Glia, 51, 132–147.
17. Kocsis, J. D., Lankford, K. L., Sasaki, M., & Radtke, C. (2009).
Unique in vivo properties of olfactory ensheathing cells that may
contribute to neural repair and protection following spinal cord
injury. Neuroscience Letters, 456, 137–142.
18. Bonfanti, L., Olive, S., Poulain, D. A., & Theodosis, D. T. (1992).
Mapping of the distribution of polysialylated neural cell adhesion
molecule throughout the central nervous system of the adult rat:
an immunohistochemical study. Neuroscience, 49, 419–436.
19. Wainwright, S. R., & Galea, L. A. (2013). The neural plasticity
theory of depression: assessing the roles of adult neurogenesis
and PSA-NCAM within the hippocampus. Neural plasticity,
2013, 805497.
20. Lee, Y. S., Hsiao, I., & Lin, V. W. (2002). Peripheral nerve grafts
and aFGF restore partial hindlimb function in adult paraplegic
rats. Journal of Neurotrauma, 19, 1203–1216.
21. Côté, M. P., Amin, A. A., Tom, V. J., & Houle, J. D. (2011).
Peripheral nerve grafts support regeneration after spinal cord
injury. Neurotherapeutics, 8, 294–303.
22. Levi, A. D., Dancausse, H., Li, X., Duncan, S., Horkey, L., &
Oliviera, M. (2002). Peripheral nerve grafts promoting central
nervous system regeneration after spinal cord injury in the pri-
mate. Journal of Neurosurgery, 96, 197–205.
23. Wu, J. C., Huang, W. C., Chen, Y. C., Tu, T. H., Tsai, Y. A.,
Huang, S. F., et al. (2011). Acidic fibroblast growth factor for
repair of human spinal cord injury: a clinical trial. Journal of
Neurosurgery, 15, 216–227.
24. Reier, P. J., Stokes, B. T., Thompson, F. J., & Anderson, P. J.
(1992). Fetal cell grafts into resection and contusion/compression
injuries of the rat and cat spinal cord. Experimental Neurology,
115, 177–188.
25. Coumans, J. V., Lin, T. T., Dai, H. N., MacArthur, L., McAtee,
M., Nash, C., et al. (2001). Axonal regeneration and functional
recovery after complete spinal cord transection in rats by delayed
treatment with transplants and neurotrophins. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 21(23), 9334–9344.
26. Reier, P. J. (2004). Cellular transplantation strategies for spinal
cord injury and translational neurobiology. NeuroRx, 1, 424–451.
27. Thompson, F. J., Reier, P. J., Uthman, B., Mott, S., Fessler, R. G.,
Behrman, A., et al. (2001). Neurophysiological assessment of the
feasibility and safety of neural tissue transplantation in patients
with syringomyelia. Journal of Neurotrauma, 18, 931–945.
28. Kuhlmann, T., Wendling, U., Nolte, C., Zipp, F., Maruschak, B.,
Stadelmann, C., et al. (2002). Differential regulation of myelin
phagocytosis by macrophages/microglia, involvement of target
myelin, Fc receptors and activation by intravenous immuno-
globulins. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 67, 185–190.
29. Rapalino, O., Lazarov-Spiegler, O., Agranov, E., Velan, G. J.,
Yoles, E., Fraidakis, M., et al. (1998). Implantation of stimulated
homologous macrophages results in partial recovery of paraplegic
rats. Nature Medicine, 40, 814–821.
30. Moon, L., & Bunge, M. B. (2005). From animal models to
humans: strategies for promoting CNS axon regeneration and
recovery of limb function after spinal cord injury. Journal of
Neurologic Physical Therapy, 29, 55–69.
31. Popovich, P. G., Guan, Z., Wei, P., Huitinga, I., van Rooijen, N.,
& Stokes, B. T. (1999). Depletion of hematogenous macrophages
promotes partial hindlimb recovery and neuroanatomical repair
after experimental spinal cord injury. Experimental Neurology,
158, 351–365.
32. Knoller, N., Auerbach, G., Fulga, V., Zelig, G., Attias, J., Baki-
mer, R., et al. (2005). Clinical experience using incubated autol-
ogous macrophages as a treatment for complete spinal cord injury:
phase I study results. Journal of Neurosurgery, 3, 173–181.
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
33. Reynolds, B. A., & Weiss, S. (1992). Generation of neurons and
astrocytes from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central
nervous system. Science, 255, 1707–1710.
34. Takahashi, K., & Yamanaka, S. (2006). Induction of pluripotent
stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by
defined factors. Cell, 126, 663–676.
35. Hitoshi, S., Seaberg, R. M., Koscik, C., Alexson, T., Kusunoki,
S., Kanazawa, I., et al. (2004). Primitive neural stem cells from
the mammalian epiblast differentiate to definitive neural stem
cells under the control of Notch signaling. Genes & Development,
18, 1806–1811.
36. Miyata, T., Kawaguchi, A., Okano, H., & Ogawa, M. (2001).
Asymmetric inheritance of radial glial fibers by cortical neurons.
Neuron, 31, 727–741.
37. Noctor, S. C., Flint, A. C., Weissman, T. A., Dammerman, R. S.,
& Kriegstein, A. R. (2001). Neurons derived from radial glial
cells establish radial units in neocortex. Nature, 409, 714–720.
38. Temple, S. (2001). The development of neural stem cells. Nature,
414, 112–117.
39. Okada, Y., Matsumoto, A., Shimazaki, T., Enoki, R., Koizumi,
A., Ishii, S., et al. (2008). Spatiotemporal recapitulation of central
nervous system development by murine embryonic stem cell-
derived neural stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells, 26, 3086–3098.
40. Miura, K., Okada, Y., Aoi, T., Okada, A., Takahashi, K., Okita,
K., et al. (2009). Variation in the safety of induced pluripotent
stem cell lines. Nature Biotechnology, 27, 743–745.
41. Windebank, A. J. (2009). Current tissue engineering and novel
therapeutic approaches to axonal regeneration following spinal
cord injury using polymer scaffolds. Respiratory Physiology &
Neurobiology, 169, 183–199.
42. Ji, W., Hu, S., Zhou, J., Wang, G., Wang, K., & Zhang, Y. (2014).
Tissue engineering is a promising method for the repair of spinal
cord injuries (Review). Experimental and therapeutic medicine,
7, 523–528.
43. Jain, A., Kim, Y. T., McKeon, R. J., & Bellamkonda, R. V.
(2006). In situ gelling hydrogels for conformal repair of spinal
cord defects, and local delivery of BDNF after spinal cord injury.
Biomaterials, 27, 497–504.
44. Cholas, R., Hsu, H. P., & Spector, M. (2012). Collagen scaffolds
incorporating select therapeutic agents to facilitate a reparative
response in a standardized hemiresection defect in the rat spinal
cord. Tissue Engineering Part A, 18, 2158–2172.
45. Chen, N., Zhang, Z., Soontornworajit, B., Zhou, J., & Wang, Y.
(2012). Cell adhesion on an artificial extracellular matrix using
aptamer functionalized PEG hydrogels. Biomaterials, 33,
1353–1362.
46. McCall, J., Weidner, N., & Blesch, A. (2012). Neurotrophic
factors in combinatorial approaches for spinal cord regeneration.
Cell and Tissue Research, 349, 27–37.
47. Sharma, H. S. (2007). Neurotrophic factors in combination: a
possible new therapeutic strategy to influence pathophysiology of
spinal cord injury and repair mechanisms. Current Pharmaceu-
tical Design, 13, 1841–1874.
48. Berry, A., Bindocci, E., & Alleva, E. (2012). NGF, brain and
behavioral plasticity. Neural plasticity, 2012, 784040.
49. Allen, S. J., Watson, J. J., Shoemark, D. K., Barua, N. U., &
Patel, N. K. (2013). GDNF, NGF and BDNF as therapeutic
options for neurodegeneration. Pharmacology & Therapeutics,
138, 155–175.
50. Weishaupt, N., Li, S., Di Pardo, A., Sipione, S., & Fouad, K.
(2013). Synergistic effects of BDNF and rehabilitative training on
recovery after cervical spinal cord injury. Behavioural Brain
Research, 239, 31–42.
51. Mantilla, C. B., Gransee, H. M., Zhan, W. Z., & Sieck, G. C.
(2013). Motoneuron BDNF/TrkB signaling enhances functional
recovery after cervical spinal cord injury. Experimental Neurol-
ogy, 247, 101–109.
52. Stokols, S., Sakamoto, J., Breckon, C., Holt, T., Weiss, J., &
Tuszynski, M. H. (2006). Templated agarose scaffolds support
linear axonal regeneration. Tissue Engineering, 12, 2777–2787.
53. Shumsky, J. S., Tobias, C. A., Tumolo, M., Long, W. D., Giszter,
S. F., & Murray, M. (2003). Delayed transplantation of fibroblasts
genetically modified to secrete BDNF and NT-3 into a spinal cord
injury site is associated with limited recovery of function.
Experimental Neurology, 184, 114–130.
54. Chen, Q., Smith, G. M., & Shine, H. D. (2008). Immune acti-
vation is required for NT-3-induced axonal plasticity in chronic
spinal cord injury. Experimental Neurology, 209, 497–509.
55. Wang, X., Li, Y., Gao, Y., Chen, X., Yao, J., Lin, W., et al.
(2013). Combined use of spinal cord-mimicking partition type
scaffold architecture and neurotrophin-3 for surgical repair of
completely transected spinal cord in rats. Journal of Biomaterials
Science, Polymer Edition, 24, 927–939.
56. Hara, T., Fukumitsu, H., Soumiya, H., Furukawa, Y., & Furuk-
awa, S. (2012). Injury-induced accumulation of glial cell line-
derived neurotrophic factor in the rostral part of the injured rat
spinal cord. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 13,
13484–13500.
57. Guo, J. S., Zeng, Y. S., Li, H. B., Huang, W. L., Liu, R. Y., Li, X.
B., et al. (2007). Cotransplant of neural stem cells and NT-3 gene
modified Schwann cells promote the recovery of transected spinal
cord injury. Spinal Cord, 45, 15–24.
58. Foust, K. D., Flotte, T. R., Reier, P. J., & Mandel, R. J. (2008).
Recombinant adeno-associated virus-mediated global antero-
grade delivery of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor to the
spinal cord: comparison of rubrospinal and corticospinal tracts in
the rat. Human Gene Therapy, 19, 71–82.
59. Morizono, K., & Chen, I. S. (2005). Targeted gene delivery by
intravenous injection of retroviral vectors. Cell Cycle, 4,
854–856.
Cell Biochem Biophys
123
